
Page 1
International TRIZ Association
Thesis Council MA TRIZ
As a manuscript
Anton KOZHEMYAKO
Features of the use of TRIZ for solving organizational
managerial tasks: schematization of an inventive situation
and work with contradictions.
Thesis
for the title "TRIZ Master"
Scientific adviser: TRIZ Master Valery Sushkov
Chelyabinsk, 2019
Page 2
2
Content
Introduction ................................................. .................................................. .................................................. . 3
Relevance of the research topic............................................... .................................................. ............. 3
Goals and objectives of the study .............................................. .................................................. ...................... 6
The scientific novelty of the study ............................................... .................................................. ................ 7
The practical significance of the study ............................................... .................................................. . 9
The main provisions to be defended ............................................ .............................................. 9
Personal contribution of the applicant: .............................................. .................................................. ........................ 10
Testing the work ................................................ .................................................. ................................... 10
Publications on the topic of the dissertation .............................................. .................................................. ........... 10
The structure and scope of work .............................................. .................................................. ........................ eleven
The results of the study ............................................... ................................................. 12
The objectives of the study ............................................... .................................................. ......... 12
Minimally viable business system ............................................. ........................................ 12
Application of the SMART method to formalize organizational and managerial tasks ................ 14
Description of business processes .............................................. .................................................. .................... 16
Schematization developed in the Moscow methodological circle under the leadership of G.P.
Shchedrovitsky and its application for a preliminary analysis of the inventive situation ....... 20
Setting objectives based on the results of schematization ............................................. ...................................... 29
The fundamental difference between schematization and functional model ............................................ ............... 31
The algorithm of work with the organizational and managerial task with subsequent application
TRIZ tools: ............................................... .................................................. ............................. 35
The method for identifying the operational zone in organizational and managerial tasks from a pair of TP ....... 36
Goals and objectives of the study .............................................. .................................................. .................... 36
An example of the allocation of the operational zone in the organizational and managerial task .......................... 39
Roadmap for working with the operational zone in organizational and managerial tasks ........ 43
Conclusion: conclusions and recommendations ............................................. .................................................. .... 44
The effectiveness of the proposed methods ............................................... .................................................. 44
Scope and limitations of the proposed methods ............................................ ................. 44
The possibility of further development of methods .............................................. ......................................... 45
ANNEX 1 ................................................ .................................................. ....................................... 46
APPENDIX 2 ................................................ .................................................. ....................................... fifty
APPENDIX 3 ................................................ .................................................. ....................................... 57
APPENDIX 4 ................................................ .................................................. ....................................... 59
ANNEX 5 ........... ..................................... .................................................. ....................................... 66
ANNEX 6 ………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………… ... ... 79
SOURCES ................................................. .................................................. ............................................ 82
Page 3
3
Introduction
This work belongs to the field of Theory of Inventive Problem Solving.
The work consists of 2 sections and Applications.
The first section is devoted to schematization used in the analysis phase.
inventive situation (a situation characterized by the presence of necessity
satisfy the demand of a specific supersystem without a clearly defined set
problems for the further solution or direction of solving the problem [42]) with
solving organizational and management problems. It is proved that most problems in
organized social systems, set by the task manager in a form that is not enough
informative for its processing using TRIZ tools. What in general
typical for tasks in any other areas, for example: “increase productivity
lines by 5%. " Such tasks always have high uncertainty, since
resources to achieve the goal in these tasks are drawn from soft systems such as people and their
interaction.
The most convenient way of initial presentation of organizational
management tasks in a form convenient for further processing, according to the author,
is the schematization used by the followers of G.P. Shchedrovitsky, which
initially developed by the Moscow methodological circle specifically for analysis
this class of tasks. The section describes in detail how TRIZ tools
“Join” with a preliminary analysis of the problem using schematization.
The second section is devoted to the choice of the operational zone (part of the physical
spaces where there is a conflict or an undesirable effect that generates
inventive situation [42]. It is worth noting that the area in which
conflict in solving organizational and managerial tasks, not necessarily
defined as a physical point in space - approx. author) for organizational
management tasks and the allocation of resources of the operational zone. This is also said by M.S.
Rubin in his works: “The nature of the interaction field in business systems
determines the other nature of the space or zone of conflict. This is not physical
space, as is usually the case in technical systems, but rather multidimensional
space-set, consisting of conflicting elements and relationships
between them ”[44].
The paper indicates the scope of this tool and explains
why this approach is preferable precisely for this class of problems.
The Appendix shows the practical application of the described methods.
Relevance of the research topic
Since the 90s, the issue of application of the methodology has been actively discussed in the TRIZ environment
for solving problems in social systems ([1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [36], [37] and many others
sources). A number of TRIZ specialists successfully use its tools in projects
in relation to business systems and other organized social systems,
for example, to the evolution of creative teams [37], to other organized social
systems whose purpose is not to make a profit (state structures
Page 4
four
management, military units, police, judicial system, healthcare, etc.). For that
TRIZ specialists have accumulated many successful cases in solving problems in
social systems, which indicates the intensive development of TRIZ in this direction
(in a number of works, business systems are referred not to social [5], but to information systems
[one]). Some examples of applying TRIZ to business tasks are also available on the website.
author [6].
Since any artificially created (organized) system is social
the system tends to entropy [23], [38], in such systems an obligatory function
is management. When implementing the control function in a dynamic environment
changing supersystems, modern managers face many challenges,
which the author calls organizational and managerial [11]. The term "organizational
management task ”will be described in more detail below.
Used on most of these problems, as a rule, does not cause difficulties in
managers and is solved by analogy, since most situations with which
faced manager in everyday practice, are typical [10]. However in
conditions of modern rapidly changing economic and social reality
the manager faces many inventive situations [39], which are difficult
resolve in the usual way [11]. It should be noted that the use of TRIZ for
solutions to organizational and managerial tasks are still not structured, up to
initial provisions. Take at least an emphasis in the definition of business systems: a number of authors
(NN Khomenko [37], V.A. Korolev [5], Shmakov B.V. [8], etc.) call such systems
social, and, for example, E.A. Sosnin and B.N. Poyzner [1] - informational). In a number
works like systems belong to some indefinite set - so
called "non-technical systems" (for example, [7]) or business systems that are already
somewhat more accurately [2]. Although, of course, business systems are important, but still
subsystems of a larger system - organized social systems, to which
refer, as mentioned above, not only systems aimed at extracting
arrived. Organizational and managerial tasks can arise in any of
the listed types of organized social systems, as in any of these systems
there is a management function, during the implementation of which inventive
situation.
Many attempts have been made to transfer TRIZ tools designed for
solving problems of transforming technical systems into organizational
management tasks, some of which have taken root well, and some are a product
direct, but ineffective transfer from one sphere to another, therefore
the use of such tools is doubtful, for example, the "direct translation" of the matrix
G.S. Altshuller into the language of business systems [8] (it should be noted here that along with
attempts to directly but ineffectively transfer the techniques of technical resolution
contradictions there are also deeply developed versions for solving problems in the field of
business, for example, the matrix of D. Mann, author of Hands-on Systematic Innovation for Business
and Management "[9]), however, techniques can only be applied after
formulating a contradiction, which is hardly possible at the beginning of work on
organizational and management task.
In general, the problem of studying the inventive situation before applying
TRIZ tools is a separate large-scale task. Largely application
TRIZ for solving such problems is “lame” precisely because of a lack of reliable
inventive situation analysis tool.
In addition, there is an assumption that the term "business system" [2] includes
partly (but does not absorb) both social systems and information ones.
However, this classification does not outline the sharp edges of such systems and it is difficult to understand
Page 5
5
where the social system ends and the information begins. Since the systems
described by the above concepts are very intertwined and the boundaries between them
blurred, the author does not consider it appropriate to highlight separately in the business system
social, separately informational subsystems. It’s enough to understand that business
systems are part of a larger system: organized social systems.
The author believes that it is easier to deal with the concept of organizational and managerial
tasks , this term indicates that the task is set in any organized
social system by an entity with the goal of producing a certain
improvement in the interaction of elements of the business system located in
informational and social relationships [40] .
Why does the author call this type of task organizational and managerial?
It is known that organizational tasks are associated with optimizing the allocation of resources with
the point of view of getting the most out of them. In what follows, it will be shown that
organizational tasks can be set at the level of both content and level
generalized objects in a business system (definitions of a generalized object and content
are given below). Organizational tasks are related to the organization of relations between
generalized objects in a business system and filling in generalized objects of business
systems taking into account its properties. Management tasks are tasks related to
increasing the efficiency of business system elements located in
certain relationships with each other. Since the subject of the task usually
it is required to increase the efficiency of a business system or some of its subsystem, more often
in all, he resorts to both organizational changes and managerial
impacts. In the literature, these types of effects do not often differ (for example, [23]),
however, these concepts are sharply divorced in the works of G.P. Schedrovitsky [10], therefore, the author
suggests focusing precisely on this classification and talking about organizational-
management tasks in case it is required to increase the effectiveness of any
an organized social system (in particular, a business system) or some of its
subsystems. In the future, the author uses the term “organizational
managerial tasks ”precisely in the context of tasks related to promotion
the effectiveness of an organized social system or its subsystems .
It is worth noting that the author did not meet generally accepted terminology, it is clear
describing similar systems, with the exception of the generally accepted position that design
an organized social system is designed for the goals of the customer (short-term,
medium or long term). Moreover, terms describing the structure
organized social systems, in addition to the generally accepted classification describing
hierarchy of internal structure: organization, TOP-management, departments, departments and
the design teams [26], [28], [32] are not known to the author.
Thus, the urgent question is the elaboration of an inventive situation when
statement of organizational and managerial tasks with a view to the possibility of further
analysis provided that most solvers get such tasks in insufficient
formalized form, therefore, a preliminary analysis method is required
similar tasks. It should be noted that with the problem of formalization of organizational
management tasks faced not only specialists in the field of TRIZ. This
members of the Moscow Methodological Circle (MMK) were actively engaged in the problem under
the leadership of G.P. Schedrovitsky [10], as a result of their activities, technology appeared
schematization of such tasks [41], which copes with this problem,
but generates another: this tool perfectly helps in the initial "entry into the task",
that is, in the initial analysis of the inventive situation, but is practically useless
for its further solution, however, with the problem of “solving in depth”
management tasks through the identification of contradictions and their subsequent resolution
TRIZ mechanisms do a great job. This thesis is confirmed by work experience.
Page 6
6
the author together with representatives of the methodological school G.P. Shchedrovitsky in a number
projects.
In addition, when you try to use the RBI operator to resolve inconsistencies in
organizational and managerial tasks [11], the solver inevitably faces
difficulties in determining the operational area (OZ) and determining the resources that can be
mobilize for the search for the most effective solution, since the boundaries of health
outlined by abstract concepts, rather than the physical frame of conflict, as in
technical tasks. In this paper, an attempt is made to formalize the selection
OZ when resolving contradictions in managerial tasks. The author shows how
in this way it is possible to outline the operational area not at a point in space, as is done in
technical tasks, and in the plane of abstract concepts that are often used in
description of conflict in organized social systems (motives, incentives, reaction,
values, desire, competencies, key performance indicators, etc.),
which is the core of a number of organizational and managerial tasks [11]. Application
a similar approach, including the use of a shortened version of ARIZ and its elements
to solve such problems is given in a number of cases on the author’s site [6].
The practical need for preparing organizational and managerial tasks for
further analysis using TRIZ tools is long overdue. Also obvious
the need to offer a simple and convenient mechanism for determining operational
zones, since the lack of a methodologically developed mechanism for determining OZ
restrains the use of ARIZ for this class of problems [11]. The author believes that short
ARIZ versions (in 6-7 steps) - an excellent tool for solving organizational
management tasks, which managed to prove itself in practice as reliable
a tool that provides a sustainable result.
Goals and objectives of the study
The objective of this work:
• To propose a way to formalize business tasks using schematization and
draw up a roadmap for applying schematization when deciding
organizational and management tasks in order to further successful
application of TRIZ tools.
• Develop areas of transition from schematization to TRIZ tools, including
number, at the level of the terminological apparatus. This question is
relevant also because between TRIZ and SMD specialists
methodologists (followers of the school of GP Shchedrovitsky) last
quite an active exchange of information has been going on for several years, however
the issue of transition between tools today no one
worked out;
• Develop a method for determining the operational area in the organizational
management tasks, taking into account the peculiarities of the wording
conflicting elements in similar tasks.
Page 7
7
Scientific novelty of research
The scientific novelty of this work is as follows:
• The author has developed a method for applying schematization to training
organizational and managerial tasks for the further use of mechanisms
TRIZ as an indispensable condition for the analysis of the inventive situation in the field
organizational and management tasks.
The author conducted a detailed analysis of the work of G.P. Shchedrovitsky and based
studied material developed a sequence of schematization for analysis
inventive situation simplifying the further use of tools
TRIZ in order to solve such problems. The author considers analogues of such
approaches used in TRIZ (system operator and functional
modeling during the FSA), and concludes: schematization
has a unique mechanism for determining managerial layers, and
also the concepts of a generalized object and content, which gives new
opportunities for setting private tasks in solving organizational
management tasks, with the ability to scale received
decisions. These features in the existing perimeter of TRIZ tools
are absent, which significantly inhibits the use of TRIZ mechanisms for
solving organizational and management problems.
• The author proposed a system for setting goals based on the results of schematization
inventive situation by sequential analysis [11]:
o models of a functioning system (MFS) at the junction of a system - a supersystem;
o the degree of controllability by layers in the diagram;
o relationships (communications, functions, processes);
o generalized objects and their filling.
• Compiled a roadmap:
o Identify the problem situation.
o Define the conflict area and identify conflicting pairs (objects
and subjects of organizational and managerial tasks)
o Apply system elements around the conflicting pair and
identify secondary problem situations related to the task.
o Define the relationship between the elements of the system at the level of generalized
objects (“generalized object” - a term disclosed in detail in the text
dissertations. The term does not replace, but complements the concept of “element
system ", is a subsystem of a system element). If necessary
identify processes.
o Identify the immediate elements of the system, including “regulators”.
o Identify the conflicting areas of the generalized object and content.
o Set up a system of tasks by conducting analysis:
▪ models of a functioning system (ISF) at the junction of the system -
supersystems;
▪ degree of controllability by layers in the diagram;
▪ interconnections (communications, functions, processes);
▪ generalized objects and their filling.
Page 8
8
• A method for determining the operational zone in the organizational
management tasks characterized by a high abstraction of descriptive
characteristics, as a result of which it is impossible to outline a piece of space, in
which develops the conflict (unlike most technical tasks).
This method makes it possible to use ARIZ mechanisms to resolve
contradictions in organizational and managerial tasks with high
degree of abstraction. The novelty is that using the method,
developed by the author, the solver can not only determine the operational
zone as a physical contour of space (it is worth noting that this
the possibility reinforces the use of schematization, where such sections
it’s very convenient to select), but also to determine the operational zone directly from
wording of technical contradiction, and subsequently highlight
operational zone resources in the form of factors determining the state
systems and properties indicated in technical contradiction. Skill
allocating resources from abstract concepts - the most important skill in solving
organizational and management tasks, since the physical contour of space in
the order of the solver may simply not be [11].
• Compiled a roadmap:
o Formulate a pair of TP;
o Choose a working TP;
o The conflicting pair of the selected TP forms the operational zone,
including: tool and product;
o Allocate resources in the form of a group of factors affecting the tool and
product;
o Next, we work in the ARIZ logic: we assign the RBI rule, substitute it into
rule RBI resources of the product and tool, etc.
It is worth noting that the author came across the opinion of a number of experts that
in relation to organizational and managerial tasks, it is incorrect to use the term
"Technical contradiction." A number of TRIZ specialists consider it worth highlighting
market, organizational, interpersonal and psychological (intrapersonal)
contradictions [40]. The author does not agree with this principle of division, since TP is a form
representations of the conflict, and the indicated contradictions do not apply to the form
presentation of information, and to the level of solving the problem (in TRIZ was originally designated
macro- and microlevels, and such a classification refers specifically to the level of solution
tasks. If the concept of “technical contradiction” introduces some confusion, you can
apply the already established concept of “dialectical contradiction of the first kind”) [11].
Of course, an understanding of the typical levels of formation of contradictions in solving
organizational and managerial tasks - important information for the solver, simplifying
formulation of contradictions, but terms describing levels in organizational
management task and the concept of "technical contradiction" are not
identical, and therefore interchangeable.
It is worth noting that when solving organizational and managerial tasks,
a method for quickly resolving technical contradictions is used, which is especially important
at
decision
organizational and management
tasks
characterized by
plurality of contradictions. The method was developed in the System Restriction Theory
(CBT) for working with a “thundercloud (the method is described in detail by Darrell Mann back in
2000 and published in The TRIZ Journal [12]), however, since it is used in TRIZ
a slightly different form of graphic representation of the contradiction, the author spent
Page 9
9
adaptation of this tool, as a result, the method of express analysis of contradictions became
much simpler and now requires much less time than in the original version
[12], which makes this tool extremely practical [11]. However, the author accepted
the decision not to include a description of the modified contradiction analysis tool in
the dissertation, as the author’s innovation related to the transfer of TOC approaches for
TP permissions in TRIZ do not have sufficient novelty in one form or another
used by many TRIZ specialists [12], [40]. If desired, more details
familiarize yourself with the application of this approach by the example of solving practical problems,
see appendix 3 .
The practical relevance of the study
1. The proposed methodology of schematization in order to formalize organizational
management tasks allows you to:
• Define the system contours without missing important details, and on the other hand, exclude
"Extra" elements of the system, taking into account the objectives of the task at the expense of
system visualization and highlighting the position of the solver. System Operator
the author’s opinion is not an alternative to schematization, since this tool
has no means of describing the relationship between elements of the system, he sets
only its composition;
• Put a system of tasks for further solution using TRIZ means, not missing
from consideration of important aspects of the organizational and managerial task;
• Several times reduce the time for team communication during analysis
inventive situation.
2. The proposed methodology for determining resources as factors affecting
elements of the operational zone allows you to:
• Reduce communication time when allocating an operational zone, earlier
very lengthy discussions had to be carried out in order to single out
organizational and managerial task in case the solver conceived
apply ARIZ to resolve the contradiction;
• Define the resources of the operational area as significant factors affecting
tool and product in the operational area without searching for objects in the business system, which
dramatically increases the speed of analysis and the quality of inventive solutions.
All this makes the proposed methods suitable for practical use.
in consulting projects. Detailed application examples
proposed methods in consulting projects (see Appendix, as well as sources
[6], [11]) proves their instrumental nature.
Key Points to Protect
1. APPLICATION OF SCHEMATIZATION FOR THE INVENTION
SITUATIONS IN ORGANIZATIONAL AND MANAGEMENT TASKS AND COMMUNICATIONS
SCHEMATIZATION WITH TOOLS ADOPTED IN TRIZ.
· The goals of applying schematization in solving business problems.
· The method of setting a business task through the use of schematization.
Page 10
10
· Terminological apparatus of schematization.
· The scope of schematization and its application in conjunction with others
TRIZ tools.
· Conclusions on the use of schematization.
2. METHOD FOR IDENTIFYING THE OPERATIONAL ZONE IN
ORGANIZATIONAL
MANAGEMENT TASKS FROM MODEL OF TECHNICAL CONTRADICTION.
· The objectives of the allocation of the operational zone in business tasks.
· In what cases is it necessary to resort to the allocation of the operational zone in business
task.
· Difficulties with determining the operational area in business tasks.
· The method of isolating the operational zone from the technical contradiction model.
· The definition of tools and products and the allocation of resources as factors
affecting the tool and product in the operational area.
· Conclusions on the application of the method for identifying the operative zone from the model
technical contradiction.
Personal contribution of the applicant:
1. The use of schematization according to GP Schedrovitsky for pretreatment
poorly inventive situation in organizational and managerial tasks with
the purpose of obtaining a system of private tasks, which are then processed with
using the TRIZ arsenal. Connection of schematization with TRIZ tools.
2. Application of the categories “Generalized object” and “Filling” in order to obtain
scalable solutions when using TRIZ tools to solve
organizational and management tasks. The terms "Generalized Object" and
The "generalized object" is explained in detail below. Briefly: “Generalized
object ”and“ Filling ”- subsystems of a system element, these concepts are refined
the concept of "system element" and are of great practical importance in the analysis
organizational and management tasks from the perspective of scaling received
decisions;
3. Development and testing of a method for determining the resources of the operational zone in
organizational and management tasks.
Work approbation
1. Scientific conference “TRIZ. The practice of applying methodological
tools. " Moscow, 2016;
2. Training under the TRIZ program in full-time and distance format, trained more
300 specialists. During the training, students solved problems from their practice under
the author’s guidance and used these tools in their projects;
3. At the time of writing the dissertation, the author has completed more than 50 consulting
projects using these tools;
4. The book TRIZ. Solution of business problems / A. Kozhemyako. - M .: Synergy University,
2017 .-- 288 pp., Ill. - answers to questions from readers who applied the recommendations in
their projects. In 2019 comes the 2nd edition, revised and supplemented.
5. Scientific conference "TRIZ-Summit", Minsk, 2019
Publications on the topic of the dissertation
1. TRIZ. Solution of business problems / A. Kozhemyako. - M .: Synergy University, 2017. -
288 p.: Ill .;
2. A. Kozhemyako. Non-technical TRIZ: experience in solving organizational and managerial
tasks, limitations and tools. Materials for the VIII anniversary conference
“TRIZ. The practice of using methodological tools and their development. ”
Page 11
eleven
3. A. Kozhemyako. Ideas for the joint use of TRIZ and SMD for solving problems
business. Publication on the sitewww.bmtriz.ru.
4. Kozhemyako A. Ideas for the joint application of TRIZ, SMD and TOS for solving problems
business. Part 2. Publication on the sitewww.bmtriz.ru.
5. A. Kozhemyako. A little about the systems thinking of the head of the sales department.
We apply system analysis. Sales Management Magazine, 03 (98), 2018
6. A. Kozhemyako. Schematization of the inventive situation in the organizational
management tasks. Materials for the conference "TRIZ-Summit".
7. A. Kozhemyako. Features of the application of TRIZ in organizational and managerial
tasks. Materials for the conference "TRIZ-Summit".
8. Morphological analysis to solve business problems - publication in a journal
"Management today."
Structure and scope of work
The work consists of introduction, three main sections, conclusion, and six
applications, including examples of practical application of the proposed methods,
set out on 83 pages; includes 28 figures, 10 tables, a list of references from
46 titles, including books and publications by the author on the topic of the dissertation.
Page 12
12
Research results
Schematization of inventive
situation.
Objectives of the study
Before a solver using TRIZ to solve organizational
management tasks, the question of a detailed clarification of inventive
situation. Practice shows that usually the solver receives such tasks from
task manager in an insufficiently formalized form [11]. Simply put, we have
dealing with “slogan” formulations of the problem [40], albeit accompanied by
“Digitized” indicators:
- it is necessary to reduce the cost of our products by 10% for 3 months;
- reduce labor costs by 15% for 6 months;
- increase the influx of target leads [16] to 300 units. per week until the end of 2018
Etc.
It should be noted that with the problem of formalization of organizational and managerial
not only TRIZ experts faced the tasks. Actively dealing with this problem
The members of the Moscow Methodological Circle (MMK) were engaged under the guidance of G.P.
Schedrovitsky [10], as a result of their activities, a schematization technique appeared
similar problem situations [41], which is able to qualitatively cope with this
problem, but does not have system tools for further solution
organizational and managerial tasks, which, in turn, contains TRIZ.
Objective: to show the benefits of applying schematization to
preliminary analysis of the inventive situation and develop a method
application of schematization in conjunction with TRIZ tools. To consider
existing TRIZ approaches to formalize the inventive situation and show
areas of similarity and areas of difference. Show the benefits of schematization.
in relation to other inventive preliminary analysis tools
situation. Link schematization with TRIZ tools when deciding organizational
management tasks.
Minimum Viable Business System
Since the dissertation is devoted to tools for working with organizational
management tasks, which, as indicated, can be set
task managers when trying to improve an organized social system,
it is necessary to better understand the functioning of such systems. Consider
typical elements of an organized social system on the example of a business system.
Page 13
13
We begin by defining the concept of the viability of a business system developed by
Valery Sushkov [2]:
Fig. 1 Minimum viable business system.
As can be seen from the diagram in Fig. 1, so that the business system is minimally
viable, it must contain a delivery processor, a generation processor
values, processor supplying value to the market. In addition, the viability of the system
supported by business processes and management functions (goal setting and
control of their implementation), carriers of these functions is the personnel of the company, in
features - managers. In business systems, people are the most significant
subsystems and supersystems . The complexity is that a person is a system
with a high degree of uncertainty (low probability of predictability
behavior), and therefore, the same parameter value at the input to the system in
depending on the specific state of the system element can give a large spread
values ​​of output, it is often possible to observe a result that is very far from the forecast.
Since sustainable business systems are supported first
queue, the functions of setting tasks and monitoring their implementation, and setting tasks
requires a clear vision from the manager [13], in business systems arises
many inventive situations, the resolution of which can clarify the vision
manager. It’s known that with many inventive tasks, a manager is not
coping due to the lack of a standard solution. In modern management
it is estimated that more than 90% of managerial decisions are standardized [10], [23]. However
remaining unsolved tasks may reduce the effectiveness of business systems, remaining
unresolved years, as practice shows. The author faced similar tasks.
in the field of document management, staff recruitment and training, marketing and sales, in
areas of CRM systems ... The situation is aggravated by the fact that it is not always easy to find and
adapt decisions from generally accepted practices - organizational and managerial
the task often needs to be closed pretty quickly.
Until these “white spots” can be overcome and clarity appears
design in the mind of the manager, the function of setting tasks for execution and controlling them
Executions cannot be fully implemented. The business system is located in
constant movement, therefore such "white spots" in the activities of modern
managers arise with enviable frequency, and time to overcome them
less and less is given away from year to year. Similar tasks called in this paper
organizational and management, have good potential for application
TRIZ tools and approaches.
Page 14
fourteen
Since the purpose of this work is to study the features
application of TRIZ to the class of tasks set in business systems should be given
attention to the definition of "organizational and managerial tasks."
The author believes that in solving this class of problems it is worth distinguishing between three
forms of activity that form the basis of management [41]:
- organization;
- leadership;
- management.
Organization is the process of forming supersystems and / or subsystems of various
level in business systems: association, organization, department, workplace finally.
Organization is precisely the formation of a structure, that is, elements and their interconnections.
Leadership (from the words to lead, lead by hands) - this is the setting of tasks
performers and monitoring their implementation.
Management is a change in the activities of performers. That is, when the structure
organized, all tasks are set (including tasks for feedback), but we are not
satisfied with the performance of performers, we are trying to change them
activity in the direction of improvement, that is, we begin to manage to manage them
activity.
All three of these activities form what can ultimately be called
"Activities in business systems." Therefore, I propose to call such a class of tasks
"Organizational and managerial". Of course, from the standpoint of using TRIZ, we
only interested in inventive situations that arise when solving
organizational and management
tasks.
Further,
at
used
term
"Organizational and managerial tasks", the requirement of inventive
situations will be implied.
However, before using TRIZ tools, an inventive situation
should be as previously analyzed. Similar analysis in organizational
management tasks has differences from pre-processing tasks,
delivered in technical systems, primarily because an element of the system
is a man - a complexly organized element that has its own goals . Besides
Moreover, the processes going on in such systems are often quite confused, contain
many difficult to capture and dynamically changing relationships, therefore
require a special approach to identification and description.
Below we consider the approaches used both in TRIZ and in management
consulting that can be applied (and applied) to describe organizational
management tasks and their comparison with the method proposed by the author
descriptions of the inventive situation in organizational and managerial tasks.
Application of the SMART method to formalize organizational
management tasks
SMART [14] (the extended formula “SMARTER” is also known) is a mnemonic
abbreviation for the principle of setting goals. This model is today
the main standard when setting tasks to subordinates, we can say that this
The main international standard in this field. According to SMART, the task should
be specific, measurable, attainable, meaningful
(relevant), correlated with a specific period (time-bounded). Perhaps this is the most
world-famous way of formalizing organizational and managerial tasks.
Examples of tasks set in accordance with the SMART model:
1) 10% of the employees are consistently late for work for 5-10 minutes,
another 3% of the team are late for more than 15 minutes. “Stable
Delays ”are considered delays more than 5 times a month. Required to lower
Page 15
fifteen
maximum stable lateness of employees up to 3, lateness of 15 minutes and
above completely exclude.
2) It is required to increase sales of the company's product (dietary supplements from natural raw materials)
20% until December 31, 2017. Growth through expansion of territories
unacceptable, an increase should occur in existing territories.
Allowable increase in marketing budget - 10%.
This method of formalizing organizational and managerial tasks is incommensurably
better than the absence of any scheme, however, it is easy to notice that such
the statement of the problem is good for execution, in case the performers have everything
necessary resources to complete the task and if the performers own
ways to accomplish it (they know how to apply these resources to achieve
set goal). However, such a model is categorically insufficient for
formalization of the task in order to find the most effective conceptual
solutions if there is no standard solution to the problem. Hence,
the SMART model does not open up the possibility of applying TRIZ methods; therefore, it does not
can be considered as a method of preliminary formalization of inventive
situation. In fact, the use of the SMART model does not allow the solver to switch from
inventive situation to the task (more precisely, to the system of tasks) suitable for further
processing using TRIZ tools. According to the author, the use of TRIZ for
the solution of organizational and managerial tasks in the first place makes it difficult
it is the lack of reliable tools to move from
inventive situation to the system of tasks in the field of business systems .
The SMART model, though, makes important refinements to the understanding of inventive
situation, but does not solve the problem of preparing an inventive situation in
organizational and managerial tasks for its further processing by TRIZ methods. AT
Currently, the SMART method is a generally accepted method of setting goals in
all over the world, mastery of the SMART method is considered one of the most important competencies
modern manager, almost mandatory elements of management. However for
formalizing the inventive situation in organizational and managerial tasks this
the generally accepted method does not give the desired result - it does not help to single out
inventive situation system of tasks that can later be processed
TRIZ tools.
There is another opinion. For example, a number of TRIZ specialists are convinced that if not
standard methods or not enough resources to solve the problem, then
any TRIZ specialist will formulate a contradiction using standard formulas.
The author strongly disagrees with this argument, since before according to standard
a contradiction will be formed to the formulas for a successful solution of the organizational
management task is required to describe a model of a functioning business system
(IFS) [15] and put the system of particular tasks to its elements (subsystems and
supersystems). Otherwise, we get a contradiction that is extremely
general nature, and therefore, there is a high risk of getting output
commonplace decisions. The author recommends formulating contradictions to each of
particular tasks posed after the analysis of the IFS. Otherwise, the solver risks
too "narrow" the obtained solutions, as a result, a situation is possible when the goal
the solver will not be finally reached [10], [11].
It is worth noting that the tree of contradictions also cannot be used on
this stage, since at the stage of formulating the organizational and managerial tasks
many contradictions are not yet visible - see the example at the bottom of the section (implementation task
new sales system in the company).
Conclusion: the SMART method helps to concretize the task for execution, but in
as a tool for primary processing of an inventive situation
cannot be used.
Page 16
16
Description of business processes
Description of business processes [34] is another method that is actively used in
consulting environment for the preliminary processing of an inventive situation. TO
Description of business processes is usually resorted to if the solver believes that
an organized business system does not function rationally, which means, unlike
the previous method of setting tasks has a narrower scope. how
as a rule, this tool is used to analyze the inventive situation in
in order to increase the efficiency of standard, well-established processes in organized
social systems.
The technology for describing business processes in world practice is standardized and
described by generally accepted notations , for example, IDEF0, BPMN, and some others [34].
In TRIZ, a similar method is also actively used in the form of stream analysis . And although
descriptions of business processes and flow analysis are not quite the same thing [11] (flow analysis
describes the transfer of matter, energy or information, contains sources,
consumers and the flow path, and the description of the business process focuses on
the list of operations performed by the owner of the process and participants in the process), yet these
methods have a lot in common.
An example of a business process description:
Fig. 2. An example of a description of a business process.
Page 17
17
In fig. 2 shows an example of a description of a business process decision-making by the bank on
a client’s loan application using BPMN notation. As can be seen from fig.
2, a similar method is great for preliminary analytics of only one
class of organizational and managerial tasks: regularly recurring optimization
operations in various parts of the organized social system. And if the task
connected not only with established processes, what to do in this case? After all, business
processes - this is only one aspect of the development of organized social systems, there is also
other levels - making strategic decisions, developing new sites
activities, relationships of process participants and other tasks.
Conclusion: the tool is very useful in solving a particular class.
organizational and management
tasks
but
not
possesses
required
versatility and is suitable exclusively for optimization regularly
ongoing processes, therefore, as a single tool for preliminary
processing
inventive
the situation
at
decision
organizational
management tasks cannot be recommended.
System operator
Consider the "classic" TRIZ tools that claim to be funds
primary analysis of the inventive situation in organizational and managerial
tasks.
There are cases when TRIZ practitioners use a system operator for this purpose
[25]. The author also uses the system operator to solve the problems posed in
business systems. One example of using a system operator to solve
organizational and management tasks are shown in Appendix 2. Using a system
operator can see the development of the system in dynamics and predict it
structure in the future, and also consider the structure of a functioning system - describe
subsystems and subsystems of the system under study (... sub-subsystems, subsystems, system,
supersystems, suprasubsystems ...).
True, the system operator has a significant drawback - it scans
system development through the composition of its elements, but does not take into account the layers of the system and
does not show the connection between the elements of the system, which, of course, sharply limits
the capabilities of this tool in terms of describing organized social
systems. In addition, the structure of a functioning system is taken only element-wise, in
Unlike schematization, which looks through layers, groups, relationships, processes and functions. BUT
if the supersystems are on completely different management layers, what to do in
this case? How to set specific objectives for management effectiveness
elements of the system? The system operator does not reflect the phenomenon of control (Fig. 3).
The advantages of the system operator include its versatility and adjustable
level of detail of system elements, as well as the ability to trace evolution
system, its subsystems and supersystems, which determines the prognostic value of a given
tool.
Thus, the minus of the system operator is the impossibility of adjustable
decomposition of the elements of the supersystem, the impossibility of drawing relationships between
elements of the system and supersystem (the structure is taken as if in isolation, without indicating
connections between system elements), as well as the impossibility of demonstration in the model
control schemes, which is a critical point in the study
inventive situation in order to solve organizational and managerial problems.
Page 18
eighteen
Fig. 3. The structure of the system operator.
Nevertheless, the author considers the system operator a perfectly applicable tool
to solve organizational and managerial tasks, but not for the purpose of preliminary
analysis of the inventive situation, and in order to study the system in the context of its
evolution [11], which is important for a number of strategic tasks, where situational
the interaction of system elements should not be taken into account.
Unlike the specific inventive situation posed by the customer
in an organized social system, tasks worth exploring with
using a system operator, usually wear a common or strategic
nature (Appendix 2).
Structural Analysis and Functional Modeling
These types of analysis used in the PSA [19], most accurately describe
inventive situation when solving organizational and managerial problems, since
show the composition of the system, elements of the supersystem, the relationship between the elements of the system,
functions, and modern varieties of PSA allow you to select groups of elements and
even take into account the processes occurring in the system [17]. Functional Example
shown in fig. four:
Page 19
19
Fig. 4. Simplified functional diagram of the construction helmet (in red
harmful functions are shown).
It is this approach that makes it possible to conduct a preliminary analysis
inventive situation with the aim of setting particular tasks, which subsequently
can be solved using TRIZ tools. However functional
modeling there is still the same key flaw characteristic of any
methods developed for the analysis of technical systems: the method does not take into account the context
control between the elements of the system, in addition, part of the elements of the functioning
systems are well-modifiable objects of the material world, and
part - subjects, that is, people performing certain functions, but at the same time
having their own goals, dynamically changing emotions, patterns of behavior, etc.,
that is, objects that are difficult to predict behavior. For description
such objects require a special language in order to develop solutions that
subsequently can be replicated.
When solving organizational and managerial tasks, ignore this
impossible, since people in organized social systems are
essential (and often the most important) elements of the system.
Conclusion: the author believes that functional analysis has great potential
for solving organizational and managerial problems, in the author’s book [11] in detail
an example of solving a similar problem is analyzed, but this tool is more likely
applicable for optimizing business systems related to improving the structure
social systems and their subsystems [39] and is not quite convenient for preliminary
analysis of inventive situations arising in such systems, since not
takes into account the features of the description of people as subsystems of the social system, also
it does not take into account the dynamically changing control action of elements
systems on top of each other in the context of the considered inventive situation (
is, does not take into account the features of "soft" systems).
Page 20
twenty
Schematization developed at the Moscow Methodological
a circle (MMK) under the leadership of G.P. Shchedrovitsky and her
application for preliminary inventive analysis
the situation
This method was formed in the Moscow Methodological Circle under
the leadership of G.P. Schedrovitsky [10] in order to organize the group’s thought activity
professionals who discuss problematic situations in the field of organization and
management. The meaning of this tool was to gradually apply to
“Map” system elements that are significant in terms of the task being solved and communication
between them, that is, get a tool for the manager, similar to the main
tools of military strategists - a map, the detail of which is manifested
gradually, in the course of the thought activity of the officers planning the military
operation. The author considers these developments to be an excellent alternative to the method described.
above methods in terms of formalizing the inventive situation, however in
in its pure form, getting synthesis schematization + TRIZ was not so easy.
In essence, schematization is a visualization of an inventive situation,
made according to system categories
and understanding
functioning of the system [10]. It is this tool that the author considers optimal
to conduct an initial analysis of the inventive situation when solving
organizational and management tasks. It should be noted that the author had to
restore the categories of schematization below yourself on
the basis of a detailed study of the work of G.P. Schedrovitsky, as at present
schematization is greatly simplified and many SMD methodologists build schemes without taking into account
of the categories of systems below, some generally simplified schematization to
scribing [35].
Therefore, the author had to restore principles on his own
schematization of the work of G.P. Schedrovitsky, and then independently develop
methods for setting goals based on the results of schematization of inventive
situations in organizational and managerial tasks.
Based on the analysis of the works of G.P. Schedrovitsky can distinguish the following categories
schematization:
1. IFS (frame);
2. Layers;
3. Groups;
4. Communication;
5. Functions;
6. Processes;
7. Generalized objects;
8. Filling.
Disclaimer required: category “ system frame ” in terminological apparatus
G.P. Shchedrovitsky may be replaced by the category “ model of functioning
systems ”developed by Nikolai Shpakovsky [15].
Since the author spent a significant part of his work in departments
marketing and sales of international corporations and is the author of a three-volume
“The era of smart sales ...”, where he summarized the experience gained and described his
methodological add-ons in this area, and currently leads
a significant part of projects in the field of marketing and sales in the B2B market [27], then
many examples of processing organizational and managerial tasks the author gives
Page 21
21
precisely from these areas. Of course, this does not mean that the circle of organizational
managerial tasks are limited to these areas. Rather, tasks from
marketing and sales are a kind of organizational management
tasks.
The model of a functioning system (MFS) is determined in two stages:
1. Isolation of the kernel.
The inventive situation presented by the task manager indicates that there is
resistance of managers who do not accept the new sales system,
implemented at the enterprise. It’s known that before that, managers didn’t work randomly,
their work was determined by a different sales technology supported by the enterprise, to
which they got used to. After conducting these simple arguments, we got
structural core, which can be represented as a section of the circuit (Fig. 5):
Fig. 5. The core of the problem, presented in the form of a diagram.
In fig. 5 we see the main defendants in the task - the “resisting” themselves
managers, what they resist is the complex sales system being implemented
solutions and the existing sales system, which they managed to get used to in time
work. Sales systems conflict with each other (this is a logical conflict), in this
case - differ in content and requirements, as shown by the dashed arrow,
in addition, managers also conflict with the newly introduced sales system, as
it requires them to restructure their work, which causes dissatisfaction of sellers.
The new system is promoted by the head of the sales department, so between the head
sales department and managers, we also observe a conflict of interest. Further on the diagram
show this connection. The core of the circuit always represents the minimum circuit.
conflict given by inventive situation.
2. Definition of connections from the core of the task to the supersystem and the final
definition of IFS (framework).
To whom the managers express their dissatisfaction, who perceives them
resistance? In the course of communication with the task manager, it turns out that first of all
- to the head of the sales department (in the diagram in Fig. 5 and 6, he is indicated as ROP). Or maybe
and customers, which is unacceptable to the company. In any case, customers should be
plotted, since they ultimately reflect the effect of internal
changes in the sales department.
Page 22
22
Why is a sales system created? To increase conversion rates,
efficiency of work with the client, and as a result - to conclude more transactions on
large amounts without hiring additional sales staff. What else
“Hurt” the sales system? CRM system implemented in the company (Customer Relationship
Management - customer relationship management [16]). New sales system
will require major changes to work with the main software
software in the sales department - CRM system. Therefore, the diagram depicts a conflict
a new sales system with an existing CRM system, to which specialists of the department
sales managed to get used to. The problem is not that the installed system does not have
certain options, this is a secondary task, smaller than the one we
trying to formalize. The problem is that the "relationship" of sellers with
new requirements of the CRM system.
In addition, the work of the sales department relates to the activities of other company services -
production, warehouse, logistics, accounting ... This is important, but at the stage of setting the task
it is too early to engage in deep detailing of these processes; therefore, we denote “points
touch "sales department with other company services as" end-to-end business processes ",
which can also be transformed under the action of the new
sales models. So we got a formed model of a functioning
system consisting of: sales staff, head of sales,
the existing sales system, the new sales system that is replacing it, target
client groups, CRM systems and end-to-end business processes:
Fig. 6. A model of a functioning system, presented in the form of a diagram. Abbr .: ROP-
Head of Sales Department.
Page 23
23
The concept of a layer in a circuit.
The layer in the diagram symbolizes that a system element or group of elements,
placed on a parent layer, controls an element or group of elements,
located on the lower layers in the context of the task (i.e. the layer is
graphic representation of the fact of managing the activity of one element by
relation to another). And although the system in most cases is defined as
a set of interconnected elements, it is obvious that the elements can be in
different relationships with each other in the studied system, that is, between the elements
the management hierarchy is built in terms of a certain activity ,
studied by us in the context of the problem being solved. The concept of a layer allows us to consider
elements of the system based on their dynamically changing hierarchy, where the hierarchy
elements is determined based on the understanding of which element is the control, and
which element carries out “orders” of more “senior” elements of the system, moreover
not at all, but exclusively in the context of specific activities related to
set organizational and managerial task.
It is worth noting that the concept of a layer does not replace the concepts of a sub-sub-system, a subsystem,
a system, a supersystem, etc., so layers are not at all the same as we depict in
system operator. If subsystems, supersystems, etc. pretty tough
fixed, layers are constantly changing in the context of the activity of elements,
depicted in the diagram.
That is, as an important concept for the analysis of business systems, the author suggests
use schematization with the allocation of "layers", explaining this with the basic properties
organizational and management systems built on a dynamically changing
hierarchy of management in the context of the studied activity of system elements .
It is important to note that subsystems are subsets of the system, the system itself is
a subset of the supersystem. As you know, subsets have the property of similarity
the sets of which they are a part. In other words, a subsystem is a multitude
elements that make up the system, broken down by some criteria into subsets
[45].
For example, a subset of the decision center [16] in an organization is
seller of the company - a potential supplier of the product, since the seller is his
a subset from a decision-making perspective (he makes a decision based on
information transmitted by the seller, but not only. In the process of deciding on
the decision center also has other subsets). But what element
what activities does it manage? This is a big question. The answer is only in the context of the task.
Suppose, in the process of implementing his functions, the manager conducts research
customer needs, on the basis of which will subsequently prepare a commercial
sentence. What element of activity controls what? Of course, the client
controls further actions of the seller based on the information provided
about your needs. Moreover, if we consider a different situation, where the needs
customer is a product, then the layers will change again, that is, the seller through questions
will manage the activities of the decision center. At the same time, the PS and NS remained at
their places, only layers change. Another example. The seller forms a picture of the world
customer, creating value in his offer. Which element is the activity of which
is driving now? Now the seller manages the activities of the client from a position of acceptance
solutions.
PS
also
governs
activities
NA
at
this
context.
Please note: PS and NS did not change places, and the layers changed.
This is the most important understanding from the point of view of finding a solution to a problem in organizational
managerial context, therefore, the concept of a layer is not a substitute for the concepts of NS and PS.
Rule image layers in the diagram : if any elements of the system are depicted
in the diagram is higher than the others, then the solver ranks them in the upper layer, i.e.
in the context of this inventive situation considers them as managers
elements. The main thing is to always remember the rule: layers may vary depending on
contemplated inventive situation.
In fig. 6 layers are clearly visible in the context of the task:
business processes largely determined the configuration of the existing CRM system;
Page 24
24
CRM-system, which was configured based on the requirements of the existing system
sales, at the moment is a deterrent to the introduction of a new
sales systems, as it is reliably connected with end-to-end business processes in the company,
which implies the use of its reports by a number of related units.
It does not support the functions required for the new sales system, but the transition to another
CRM-system, although it will provide the necessary functions for the introduction of a new
sales systems are highly likely to create similar conflicts at the junction
sales department with other divisions of the company. From here it’s easy to conclude
that sales staff are on the next layer - they are “managed”
established business processes in the company and the CRM system that has “taken root” in it,
supporting the current sales system, which, in turn, is not
satisfied with the head of sales and the best employees, as it does not provide
effective work with customers in a modern highly competitive market.
It is easy to notice that the schematic representation of the MFS taking into account the layers makes a lot of
important refinements in understanding the inventive situation. An analysis of the circuit shows that
at least a few contradictions are hidden in the problem (of course, such a representation
an inventive situation requires the solver to develop sketching skills,
so in the process of constructing a scheme is a bidirectional thought process: the scheme
is built in the process of analyzing layers, but on the other hand, layers “appear” in
the process of constructing the circuit. Therefore, in practice, the IFS scheme is usually
redrawn several times, until full clarity is established in the description
inventive situation between the task manager and the solver ).
To this point, the author received the observation that since a circuit is rarely created in one
passage, then this approach strongly resembles MP&O. The author does not consider MP&O and
iterative approach with identical concepts, as during several iterations
the scheme is refined, and not at all its new image obtained by random
way. Does the formulation of TP or RBI solver does not clarify
definitions often iterative? It’s far from always possible to get the final
wording the first time. The same thing happens when applying schematization.
Groups of IFS elements (groups).
A group is a combination of elements of a system to fulfill a specific
functions. If the group is taken as a separate system, then we can talk about the GPF (main
useful function) of the group The author believes that instead of the term “group”, introduced
G.P. Shchedrovitsky, it’s completely appropriate to use the terms TRIZ - a system,
subsystem, sub-subsystem ... Usually, if solving a problem requires more
general consideration of the elements of the system, then more detailed (in the course of work on the task
such transitions are assumed that becomes apparent in the communication process
solver and problem-taker), it is convenient to give on the diagram the required detailing of the elements and their
relationships for deeper analysis, but at the same time when more
surface analysis, combine such elements (sub-subsystems) into groups
(subsystems) with allocation of the general function of the group. In practical application
schematization for the analysis of an inventive situation, such a division may have
very important, for example, in the task of increasing the efficiency of a department
(in this case, the sales department) the following scheme was developed for analysis
inventive situation:
Page 25
25
Fig. 7. Scheme of the sales department with the allocation of layers and groups. Abbr .: KAM - key account
manager (key account manager), lead - potential
a client who in one way or another responded to marketing communication.
The groups in the diagram are:
- marketing department;
- sales department;
- customers.
For example, why did the company have a marketing department? To prepare and conduct
marketing promotions? To study the market? For advertising campaigns? For
marketing analytics? To carry out public relations
(PR)? Marketing should carry out all these functions, but they are not the main ones. They -
auxiliary. All these functions are needed in order to promote your product on
the market. So the GPF of the marketing group (department) is the promotion of the company's product on
market by influencing target client groups (again groups, only now they
combined by functional features of consumption). GPF group (department) sales
the same, but with some differences - promoting a company's product on the market by
personal impact on the client. In essence, the differences between them are in the way
impact on the target audience.
Groups can be not only departments and departments. It can be design
groups or, for example, groups of employees united by some social
sign or, say, the time of work in the company. It all depends on the condition
set task. Only one important rule should be remembered. Any group
has its own GPF, essential from the point of view of the problem being solved. Arbitrary
division of elements into groups within the framework of a functioning system is unacceptable, so
how it complicates the task, burdens it with unnecessary information. There is a question: is it worth
whether to introduce this concept or dwell on the concept of a subsystem, traditionally
Page 26
26
used in TRIZ? Perhaps, instead of the concept of “group”, the concept of “aggregation”
elements ”, which is also known in TRIZ? At this stage, the author proposes this
leave open the discussion question.
Function .
Functional language is perfectly developed in TRIZ and, perhaps, is the main
in the analysis and description of the system: first of all, with the use of FSA. Therefore in
Within the framework of this work, a detailed description of the concept of “function” is not required.
Processes and communications.
These are the most important categories of schematization.
A process is a course, the course of a phenomenon in time. In this definition
the key word is "phenomenon."
Relationships - a designation on the diagram showing that in the context of the task it is important for us that
element A affects element B, but what processes are going on is not important for us.
Since the circuit in Fig. 7 is functional, processes are not indicated on it,
but the arrows show the functions. But if when creating a functional diagram is not
managed to get a working model, that is, when analyzing the scheme, breaks and promising
the trajectories of the solution to the problem were not visible, then you should start to plunge into
processes.
Interestingly, in TRIZ this problem of the process level has already been discussed,
for example, in relation to advanced functional analysis developed by
Naum Feigenson and Oleg Feigenson [17], when as a result of the FSA
not one, but several functional models are built, each for a specific
the state of the system due to the processes occurring in the system.
Here we can clearly see the fact that in most problems the solver has enough
remain at the functional level (then only functions and
communication), but there are times when the system has to be considered in various
states depending on the processes occurring in it. Similarly, when conducting
schematization of an inventive situation, there are times when the scheme requires
indicate also the processes going between the elements of the system. Understanding the difference
processes and relationships are very important for quality sketching
inventive situation and subsequent task setting by analysis
scheme inventive situation.
You can see an example of such a scheme in the diagram below:
Page 27
27
Fig. 8. The scheme of analysis of the inventive situation to the problem of increasing
the effectiveness of the mentoring process.
In the diagram shown in fig. 8, you can see the simulation of the mentoring system,
organized in the sales department. The processes indicated by
arrows that go when planning a strategy for concluding a deal, the student’s work in
field conditions ”and the processes that occur during the organization of feedback from the student
to the mentor. In addition, the task involves immersion in the processes taking place in
the period of supervision by the mentor of the development of the student's skill in using the tool,
which the latter should develop on the instructions of the mentor.
To date, the author does not have data on the existence of
methodology allowing at the stage of schematization of an inventive situation
clearly determine whether to go to the process level or enough
limited to a scheme containing the necessary elements, their functions and relationships.
The practical recommendation is as follows: first we build a diagram that describes
inventive situation at the level of connections and functions, and then, if the data is clearly
not enough for further processing with TRIZ tools, we begin to delve into
consideration of processes taking place between elements of the system, for which purpose
stream analysis or business process analysis using standardized
notations [34].
The application of the process scheme leads to inevitable complications of the scheme,
describing an inventive situation, therefore, when conducting schematization
should be guided by the principle of expediency and designate processes only
where there is a need for their detailed study (see the case on the introduction of a new
sales systems at the bottom of the section: Appendix 5).
Generalized object and content.
Let's move on to the concept of “generalized object” and “filling”. In the opinion of the author, from
categories developed by G.P. Shchedrovitsky, these concepts are one of the key points
view of applying system analysis to inventive situations arising in
areas of organization and management. These categories apply to schematization,
responsible for scaling the resulting solutions. Scaling is critical
characteristics of the decisions in the organizational and managerial sphere .
When conducting schematization from the perspective of the categories of “generalized object” and
"Filling", not only sharply increases the likelihood of getting scalable
solutions, but also increases its stability, that is, the ability to withstand
disturbances of the environment. In fact, at the stage of schematizing the inventive situation
laying the foundation for the quality of a future solution.
So, a generalized object is a vacant unit, like a “shell” of an element,
which sets the requirements for this element.
Generic objects have properties that define the requirements for their
filling . For example, a generalized object "leader", a generalized object
"Teacher", etc.
Generic objects are related to other generic objects in the structure,
however, for the system to function, generalized objects must be filled.
Someone must be a milling machine operator, manager, driver - for example,
computer program or person (see Fig. 1 - it is indicated that the person is
subsystem or supersystem of an organized social system (for example, business
systems), although if we look in more detail, then the subsystem or super-system will be
not a person as such, but a generalized object, which should have an appropriate
filling). Filling is a system that fills a generalized object in
according to his requirements, somehow a person who has the appropriate
competencies or, for example, a computer program with certain
characteristics corresponding to the requirements of generalized objects.
Page 28
28
In technology G.P. Shchedrovitsky requirements of generalized objects are called
properties-functions , and filling properties - attributive properties (in texts
G.P. Shchedrovitsky generalized objects are called "places", but the author believes that
such a name is more likely to cause confusion). So in organizational management
tasks, a special class of problems arises - tasks for matching the requirements of generalized
objects (properties-functions) and filling properties (attributive properties).
When solving organizational and managerial tasks, the solver must understand
at what level is it worth solving the problem. If the problem is solved in the space of the organization
or its unit (department, department, site), it is important to try to find
solution at the level of generalized objects, which will determine further scaling
received decision. If the task is set at the level of a specific content, then
the solver must warn the customer that the solution most likely
will be special for this case and the scaling of the resulting solution will be
is fraught with certain difficulties (if at all possible).
Generalized objects can be represented as subjects (this is a generalized
object, the filling of which is a person, and objects (computer
program, any document, robot, etc., see fig. 9).
Some notation used in the diagrams :
Fig. 9. Some designations used in the scheme of the inventive situation.
Page 29
29th
Setting objectives based on the results of schematization
Two options for further analysis after
schematization:
Option 1. Work with existing gaps.
We find gaps , that is, discrepancies between the “how it should be” and the
what is currently shown in the diagram. On breaks private can be put
tasks ( see Appendix 1 ).
Next, we highlight a list of unwanted effects (NE). Work with
undesirable effects in TRIZ well developed, most often for this purpose
a causal analysis is applied. Therefore, according to the results of schematization
Inventive situation, we can advance in a variety of ways:
We get a list of NEs and conduct a causal analysis. This way
applicable if all NEs in the diagram are obvious;
We identify the gaps in the diagram and set the task to eliminate them. To received
tasks, you can apply the primary processing mechanisms of the task, long and successfully
used in TRIZ - stream analysis, functional analysis, causal
investigative analysis, benchmarking ... [18]. There are many variations, we must move from
context. No one forbids applying schematization to clarify in detail
gap structure, if the obtained task is a new inventive situation with
many unknowns [11];
Highlight technical inconsistencies and continue to work with them (technical
contradiction: a situation that arises when trying to solve an inventive problem
by improving a specific feature (parameter) of the system, which leads to
unacceptable degradation of another attribute (parameter) of the same system [42] ) . In that
in the event decisive TRIZ mechanisms come into operation.
Option 2. Analysis of the current inventive situation and statement of private
tasks. This is the path we took, solving the problem of a multiple increase in sales
construction equipment in the channel "road construction" (Fig. 10). The problem was
that over the past three years, the company's product margin has been halved, and
sales are steadily falling. Marginality is known to add up to structure
costs and market value. We decided to start from the second and analyze the structure
construction equipment market (Fig. 10 gives an example of a rough analysis of the situation, but in order
in order to understand that the current business strategy of the company has been chosen incorrectly,
sketching without fine detail turned out to be quite enough):
Page 30
thirty
Fig. 10. Preliminary “rough” design scheme of the construction machinery market
in the southern Urals.
To come to the choice of a promising road map, we plotted
budget allocation for road construction and sorted out the hierarchy of this
distribution - so the layers in this diagram were grouped by region
(groups). Further, understanding the price segmentation of construction equipment, it turned out
it is easy to compare these two parameters with the practice of the tasker, and then note two
points on the diagram - layers the company is working with now and as much as possible
a layer close to the consumer, capable of acquiring the technology of this segment
based on the data plotted on the scheme and its typical needs. So decided
promising roadmap, which was significantly different from the existing
company’s market strategy. To implement the resulting roadmap
it was required to pose a number of tasks and resolve the contradictions that arose.
At first glance, it may seem that this scenario is similar to the construction
functional model during the PSA, as the scheme and functional model
describes the structure of the system. However, the scheme also clarifies the layers, showing
dynamic control hierarchy, and also allows you to simulate depth
interactions between system elements, by introducing a chain of concepts
communication-function-process, reveals the composition of subsystems, if necessary with
positions of the problem being solved (group or aggregation of elements), including
the ability to select groups passing through the layers "diagonally", for example, if
To the problem condition, it becomes necessary to analyze the work of project teams with
taking into account the employee performing two or more roles (for example, a member of the project team
- an employee of the financial service), when conducting schematization, the solver has
the ability to distinguish between filling properties and requirements of generalized objects,
which is critical from the point of view of scalability of the resulting solution (more
one example of an inventive situation is depicted in the diagram in fig. eleven).
Page 31
31
Fig. 11. The scheme of selection of employees according to the competency model.
In fig. 11 shows a diagram compiled by the author to describe
inventive situation that arose during the selection of employees for certain
positions taking into account changes in the requirements of generalized objects in the process of evolution
organization according to the model of I. Adizes (Fig. 11 shows the so-called PAEI code
(P - production of results, A - administration, E - entrepreneurial function
and I is integration. PAE refers more to generalized objects, I to content). The code
PAEI is shown in fig. 11 as a function of the requirements of generalized objects and properties
filling. The diagram also shows the significant roles of the process participants,
located on three layers and elements of the personnel selection system related to
generalized objects (competency model) and content (assessment of competencies and type
personality and ability assessment).
Therefore, despite a certain similarity with the functional model, the circuit
a slightly different tool. Its main purpose is to isolate the system of tasks from
primary inventive situation . The author suggests using schematization
to formalize the inventive situation when solving organizational
management tasks. Schematization should be applied immediately after clarification.
problems and goals of the solver before using the usual TRIZ tools.
The fundamental difference between schematization and functional model
Select layers . The functional model used in the FSA does not imply
building a hierarchical scheme with the allocation of layers, where the subject of management is
parent layer in comparison with the control object. Similar hierarchy of elements in
the scheme is very important for the analysis of the inventive situation in the organizational
management tasks (the very concept of organizational and management tasks requires
representations of system elements depending on the control hierarchy in terms of
set task).
Representation of a system element as a Generalized object and
Filling, a clear understanding of whether we are solving the problem at the level of a generalized object
Page 32
32
or at the filling level . The author pointed out above that business systems are soft
systems, since they include humans as the main subsystems.
The author also emphasizes that it is impossible to simply transfer tools from
technical sphere in a business system. To handle the inventive situation in
business systems require specific tools that can prepare
task to use the "standard" TRIZ tools.
The algorithm for working with the circuit
The algorithm for working with the circuit is as follows:
• based on the situational analysis that we carry out on the scheme,
the most acceptable way of conducting further
transformations, which is defined as a priority (road
map of future traffic).
• as soon as the roadmap is selected, we immediately attach it to the existing one
system, we see the secondary tasks in the form of directions or NE, which
will appear in the system when implementing the selected roadmap.
• If necessary, analyze selected tasks with tools
primary processing tasks adopted in TRIZ.
• If necessary, we form technical contradictions. Next for
permissions
selected
contradictions
apply
famous
TRIZ tools.
An example of the use of schematization for setting objectives for
organizational and managerial task (the case is described in detail in
Appendix 5):
A system consisting of:
sales department of an industrial enterprise,
manufacturing tooling from heat-resistant steels, presented
head of sales, sales staff and the current system
sales (Fig. 12).
The essence of the problem: the head of sales (ROP) implements a new sales system,
having advantages over the previous one in terms of depth of study
customers and, as a result, allowing to increase the average amount of the contract and
conversion, however, managers resist and are in no hurry to leave the “beaten”
rails. "
Required: to make managers use only the tools of the new system
sales in their activities (as the task sounded in the original formulation, that in
the process of analyzing the circuit turned out to be not quite the correct goal setting - see table).
Below, we compose a model of a functioning system, presented in the form of a diagram.
The process of constructing a circuit for this task is described above (see explanations for Fig. 6):
Page 33
33
Fig. 12. The scheme of the inventive situation in the problem of changing the sales system.
The tasks set according to the scheme (Fig. 12) using the categories of schematization:
No.
Object of analysis in
IFS
Tasks
No.
A task
one
interaction
the system
(dotted line) with
elements
supersystems
1.1.
CRM system. The conflict arose largely due to the fact that the existing CRM-system is not
adapted to the requirements of the new sales system, which creates significant
inconvenience → make the CRM system meet the requirements of the new
sales system and supported her .
1.2
end-to-end business processes. The new sales system is changing end-to-end business processes,
this is especially true in collaboration with the design department and production
→ you need to configure end-to-end processes so that the requirements of the new
sales systems were provided .
1.3.
customers. The new sales system increases the time to contact
by the customer → how to make the depth of the customers' work increase without
increase time managers?
2
Layers
2.1
The implemented sales system manages the actions of managers, imposing on them
specific requirements → How to make sales system requirements
performed, but did the managers spend as little effort as possible?
2.2
Managers are faced with the fact that for a number of clients the requirements of the new system
redundant, which does not increase, but rather reduces efficiency ( from this point of view
managers "manage" the reaction of customers, hence the distribution of layers on
scheme ) → Differentiate customers and introduce a new sales system only
in relation to such client groups in which conversion increase is expected
and the average weight of the transaction when applying this system .
3
Communications
Partially analyzed in paragraphs 1 and 2, additionally:
Page 34
34
3.1
A logical conflict between two systems, for example, the approach to
identification of needs, the stages of the transaction are radically different →
Compare the requirements of the existing and new systems, identify areas
similarities and cardinal discrepancies, disassemble into elementary steps of the area
cardinal differences, thereby simplifying the implementation (such a statement of the problem
allows the solver to rely on existing resources).
3.2
Communication defects ROP managers → Define metrics and reference points in the new
sales system, which should be feedback from manager to
to the leader. Simplify data retrieval by reference point managers.
3.3
Establish a relationship CRM-system - ROP → Having solved the tasks 3.2, bring the CRM-system in
in accordance with the decisions received, amend the procedure accordingly
meetings, strengthening communication on reference points and reducing
communication on non-essential items.
four
Processes and
the functions
4.1
The task appeared after setting the task 1.2: to conduct a detailed analysis of business
processes between the sales department and the design department, as well as between the department
sales and production department (pre-mapping processes with
using BPMN notation) . Highlight bottlenecks and set tasks for them
overcoming.
4.2.
After solving task 1.1, set the task to simplify the entry of the required data into
CRM system by entering patterns and rules.
5
Groups
5.1
Negative phenomena within a group of managers - the effect of the adoption of new
technology modeled by J. Moore → how to use innovators and early adopters
as a resource for introducing a new sales system? How to identify and
to neutralize the influence of "farther"?
5.2.
Customer groups, which follows from the analysis of the task 2.2. Dividing customers into
categories A, B and C. Define customer categories and target customer groups, for
which the new sales system is redundant. Set a task to synchronize work
department, which should apply both sales systems, if the hypothesis is confirmed and
the existing sales system would be appropriate to maintain for certain
customer groups amid the introduction of a new one.
6
Generalized
object and
filling
6.1.
To conduct training of “good middles” in the new sales system after solving problems
from paragraphs 1-5 and determine whether they have reached the level of "stars" after a given time. If not,
to conduct a comparative analysis of the work of both and conduct additional training of “good
average "according to the performance model (the performance model explains
what specific competencies make stars stars by comparing their competencies with
competencies of “good middle peasants” in the team and identification of discrepancies) .
And in addition, according to the results of applying schematization and analysis of the scheme, taking
13 categories describing the success of introducing a new
sales systems in the practice of the sales department of this production company. Author
pays special attention to the tasks set in paragraphs 2 and 6 of the table. If not
enter categories of layers and categories generalized object-filling, data
tasks might not be set. And, as mentioned above, the tasks for compliance
requirements of generalized objects and filling properties are most important from the point of
view of solving organizational and managerial tasks set in organized
social systems. Some tasks from the table do not require application
TRIZ tools - they can be put to execution using the SMART method [14].
Some tasks require the use of “primary task processing” tools: streaming
analysis, causal analysis, comparative analysis. Attempt to solve
parts of the tasks will lead to the formulation of technical contradictions [11].
So, schematization allows a primary analysis of inventive
situations when solving organizational and managerial problems and get a set of private
tasks, including taking into account layers and compliance of filling properties with requirements
generalized objects for which standard
TRIZ tools.
Page 35
35
The second option is to extract unwanted effects from the resulting scheme and
subsequently we work with them - see appendix 1 .
The algorithm of work with the organizational and managerial task with
subsequent use of TRIZ tools:
The algorithm for solving organizational and management problems using
TRIZ schematization and methods according to the results of project implementation are presented
as follows:
Fig. 13. The algorithm of work with organizational and managerial tasks. Scheme.
Page 36
36
Method for identifying the operative zone in
organizational and management
tasks from a pair of TP
Goals and objectives of the study
It is known that the operational area is the space within which
there is a conflict specified in the model of the problem [47]. The author emphasizes that with
solving organizational and managerial tasks most often, operational zones -
several, that is, usually we are not talking about one conflict, which is the cause
occurrence of an inventive situation, but about their combination. And it’s not at all a fact that
After conducting a causal analysis, the solver is guaranteed to establish one-
the only reason for their appearance, if, of course, it does not move on a causal basis
Inward-outward investigation chain.
The definition of the operational zone is required, first of all, for localization
places for choosing a resource, since decisions obtained using resources taken from
areas of conflict are closest to ideal [22].
In technical tasks, the operational zone is much easier to determine, there
it is always localized in space, and its localization is defined by the boundary
tasks. For example, if during a drilling operation, the cutting edge of the drill
blunts, then the operational zone is in the zone of cutting the metal of the workpiece, to
transition to the micro level, of course. When moving to the micro level, operational
the zone will be in the layers of the material of the cutting edge drill, possibly
will go to the level of the grain boundaries of the metal, etc. For specialists in
material science operational area is quite obvious.
When solving organizational and managerial tasks, such certainty is not
observed. For example, if you assume that you are a scientist and spent a long
analysis of the problem of employee motivation using tools
pre-processing tasks, as a result of which they were able to reach the level
neurobiology and localize the biochemical processes of the brain in the operative zone, then
in this case, the operational area will be determined by the same principles as
and in technical tasks, that is, it will be a piece of space in which there is
conflict leading to an inventive situation. What blocks
sufficient dopamine release [29]? Why not happening
positive reinforcement for which serotonin is associated with other
neurotransmitters [29]? The task becomes material, belonging
physical objects ...
However, the vast majority of managers are not neurophysiological scientists.
Even psychologists primarily operate with abstract concepts and
prefer not to touch the physical levels [23], [29]. Therefore, when deciding
organizational and physical tasks physical layer usually not available
solver. And this is not an exception, but a rule. For example, what is motivation? By
Page 37
37
by and large, motivation is the person’s inner ability to overcome
resistance to rest to achieve the goal [29] Motivation is always
concerns the inner world of man, in contrast to stimulation (external
impact) . Analyzing the phenomenon of motivation, we are forced to analyze such
categories like human abilities, peace, goal, human values ​​and
etc. - even a cursory analysis of these categories gives an understanding that the physical level
solving such problems is usually not available to the solver. At least in
present. Continue: components of motivation: goal, willpower,
self control. Goals are set by the context, environment and human value system
[24]. It’s very difficult for a solver to “grab” “hard” resources, that is, resources for
physical level. Talking about motivation, we can say a lot about conflicts,
without mentioning a single point in space.
Therefore, if the operational area is the location of the conflict,
which contains a tool (an object that performs a negative impact),
product (an object that perceives this effect) and the environment surrounding
conflicting pair [3], and the operational zone in organizational and managerial
tasks often can not be described at the physical level, then operational
a zone in such a class of tasks is nothing more than a conflicting pair isolated from
TP pairs (TP1 or TP2).
Why is there a point in solving organizational and managerial problems
first highlight the contradictions, and then move on to the allocation of the operational zone?
This is due to the fact that in such problems the contradictions are primary, usually they
manifest either in the conflict of interest of key stakeholders ( author
repeatedly used the following move in projects: after schematization
inventive situation and highlighting key stakeholders carried out
MPV analysis [43] , which allows to identify stakeholder requirements included in
contradictions, in fact - a conflict of interest. These contradictions are analyzed and
fixed in the form of a pair of TP).
Or contradictions appear when you try to make some
changes, for example, after highlighting tasks in the wake of schematization solver
comes to the conclusion that certain changes are necessary, but with mental
the projection of these changes on your system sees a secondary undesirable effect,
giving rise to a contradiction. At the junction, it is easy to formulate a new pair of TPs, which
usually done. For example, in Sberbank a similar thought experiment with
recently entrenched as an organizational and managerial norm (from
conversation of the author with TRIZ corporate training participants for employees
Sberbank TT Group) .
Understanding that operational and organizational tasks
the zone is determined by the conflicting pair in the working TP with the addition of a description
environment of negative interaction between the tool and the product (note : tool -
the subject of the negative “processing” of the object, that is, the product) , gives the key to
the source of resources closest to the source of the conflict in such tasks and
allows full application of ARIZ mechanisms to organizational
management tasks (the tool will be the state of the system in
previously selected working TP , and the product - a deteriorating consumer property
systems). The author has already indicated that to address organizational and managerial
tasks it makes sense to use only shortened, “combat” forms of ARIZ in several
steps.
Page 38
38
The main feature of the method of describing health care for management systems,
which the author describes is the use of a new factor approach when
description of the operational area. This method is well suited to the description of OZ in complex
social systems with objects distributed in time, in space and
according to other characteristics by parameters. For example, if in the purchasing department of a company
there are changes in significant areas of the business process, then such changes
entail both positive actions and undesirable effects in other departments, then
there are immediately many operational areas. The question arises: how are they
track, especially in large companies? And whether they need to be tracked, perhaps
is it easier to switch to another method of description - factorial? In addition, solutions may
have a delayed effect, and in different areas of the business - at different times.
Therefore, when solving organizational and managerial tasks, it is much more effective
consider what factors affect the state of the system and the properties specified in
identified contradictions, and use them already as resources [11].
That is, we are dealing with a situation where the system contains many
elements, each of which is determined by many factors.
It is very difficult to describe the relationships between elements in a business system, especially with
given that the relationships between the elements are constantly being rebuilt depending
from the influence of external and internal system factors. That is, highlight
elements in operational areas, and even more so, it is extremely difficult to catch the connection between them
it is difficult, therefore, to identify the operational areas associated with the studied
undesirable effect - almost impossible.
However, if we are dealing with contradictions arising in business
systems (Fig. 14, Appendix 5), in practice it is much easier to determine which
factors determine states and properties in contradiction than to look for
conflicting pairs of elements in the business system associated with the studied
a contradiction, and describe their operational areas, and later - explore the parameters
of these elements. As noted above , significant factors of X-elements
business systems that determine the state of the system and the properties recorded in
contradictions, it is much easier to detect than the elements themselves, in addition,
discovered parameters are easy to use as resources for solving
set task. That is why the factor approach in working with operational
zone when solving organizational and managerial problems should be considered as
perspective.
The author believes that this conclusion, which was obtained and confirmed in
the course of participation in more than 50 projects allows universalizing ARIZ approaches
and apply them equally successfully to both technical and organizational
management tasks.
The analysis of the ARIZ task remains the same for both organizational and
managerial and technical tasks, with the only difference being operational
the zone of the technical problem is the physical area of ​​space, and in the organizational
management tasks the operational zone is formed by a conflicting pair
“The state of the system is a consumer property” along the negative branch, in fact -
conflicting pair expressed in abstract terms (not physical
area of ​​space).
Page 39
39
Otherwise, the procedure for applying ARIZ to any artificial systems
stays the same, which allows the use of highly recommended
TRIZ tools for solving organizational and managerial tasks.
An example of the allocation of the operational zone in organizational
management task
We apply the found principle to the resolution of the contradiction depicted in
fig. 14. Recall the essence of the problem (in the form of a pair of TP), which will be the starting point in
our further considerations:
If the number of transactions is simultaneously worked out by a department employee
15 sales, then the managers go to the targets faster, however, for
fulfillment of sales plans with existing indicators of transaction conversion
increase the number of managers in the sales department, which is unacceptable (TP1).
On the other hand, if the number of transactions is at the same time
sales person 25, then to fulfill sales plans when
existing conversion rates need to hire fewer employees in
sales department, however, sales staff slowly reach the planned
indicators, which is unacceptable (TP2).
Further, according to the ARIZ logic, the working
technical contradiction, for which we carry out the following reasoning:
A sales department is created for personalized work with a customer on
creating a high subjective value of the proposal, overlapping the value
payment. Personalized work is the core of definition. If possible
the same value is created by influencing immediately on a group of consumers, the sales department does not
needed, it should be curtailed as an extra link in the business [16]. If the sales team
is present in the company and is not a consequence of psychological inertia
managers (sellers should be, because they have always been here), then
personalization of customer impact is the only way for the company
convey the high value of your proposal.
Of course, in this regard, sellers should serve the greatest
the number of transactions at the same time without loss of conversion and without
Reducing the average weight of a transaction within a specific client category . From here
it is clear that one manager should not have deals in simultaneous processing
15, 25. Therefore, the working TP is as follows (Fig. 14):
Page 40
40
Fig. 14. The choice of working TP from a pair of TP
We need to increase the workload of managers, so we select TP2 : if in
At the same time, the manager is working on 25 projects, the number of
managers in the sales department will decrease, but the manager will go on
planned targets are longer, which is unacceptable.
Then the conflicting pair will be as follows :
25 projects were given at the same time being worked out by one manager and 6
months of reaching planned sales figures.
There is clearly a conflict here: 25 projects are being worked out at the same time
one manager (tool), negatively processes the exit to the planned
sales figures (product):
Fig. 15. The operational area, including the tool, product and their environment
interactions. 25 projects - a tool, planned indicators - a product.
Next, factors that significantly affect
the tool and product included in the model of the operative zone (Fig. 15). Afterwards
identified factors can be used as resources, substituting them in the rule
ideal end result (RBI).
Page 41
41
Here is an example of identifying factors [11]:
Operational Zone Element
The role of the element Resource as a subsystem of each element
25 projects at the same time
at one manager
Tool
Decision making scheme in a category A project
Decision making scheme in category B project
Stage of the transaction (sales funnel)
Sales channels
Project related work
Errors in recruiting a customer base
Going to targets 6 months
Product
The number of leads (responses to marketing
activity)
Lead quality
Sales funnel conversion
The average frequency of a transaction per year
Employee Competencies
Client base recruitment regulations
Collaboration with colleagues
As a result, we received an impressive list of resources for solving
tasks. Some can be further decomposed, for example: sales channels,
related work of the manager in the project, etc.
If there are many resources received, they can be subjected to the procedure
prioritization, for example, according to the following logic (priority falls on the left
to the right) [25]:
1. The element of the operational zone: Product → Environment → Tool
2. Quantity: Unlimited → Sufficient → Limited
3. Quality: Harmful → Neutral → Useful
4. Value: Free → Penny → Dear
Prioritization of resources: the higher the final score, the higher the priority [11]:
Operational Zone (OZ) Resources
Element oz
amount
Quality
Value
ITO
G
Ed
e
l
and
e
Wed
e
Yes
Ying
page
mind
e
nt
N
e
about
gr
ani
what
nn
th
D
about
stato
h
th
ABOUT
gr
ani
what
nn
th
Vre
dny
(about
tho
dy)
N
e
th
tr
alny
P
about
l
e
know
B
e
spl
atomic
TO
about
ne
e
h
th
D
about
R
about
go
th
Decision making scheme in a category A project
one
3
one
one
6
Decision making scheme in category B project
one
3
one
one
6
Stage of the transaction (sales funnel)
one
3
2
one
7
Sales channels
one
2
2
2
7
Project related work
one
3
2
2
8
Manager errors when recruiting a customer base
one
2
3
3
9
Number of leads
one
one
one
one
four
Lead quality
3
one
one
one
6
Sales funnel conversion
3
one
one
one
6
The average frequency of a transaction per year
3
2
one
2
8
Employee Competencies
3
one
2
one
7
Set-up regulations
2
3
one
one
7
Collaboration with colleagues
2
2
one
one
6
Page 42
42
In our example, three resources allocated in
table in gray. Therefore, they should be used first.
For this problem, more than 10 solutions were obtained using dedicated
resources, and this is for one pair of TP! For example, I would like to show how it worked
harmful resource - manager errors that get the maximum score.
In the ARIZ logic, the ideal final result (RBI) rule is assigned and then
instead of the X-element, the selected resources are substituted. (RBI - decision
inventive task, allowing to obtain the desired result with
zero compensation factors. As follows from the laws of physics, such
a solution can never be reached and therefore the concept of perfect
the final result serves to reduce the degree of psychological inertia in
the process of solving the problem by orienting the problem solver to search
solutions with the highest degree of ideality [42] ).
We demonstrate these steps:
1. Rule of RBI : <X-element> itself provides access to planned indicators
manager for 3 months ( condition of the task manager ), provided
performance index of 25 projects at the same time exploring ( with
increasing the load on managers to achieve planned targets in
companies occurred on average for 6 months ).
2. Manager mistakes when recruiting a database of projects themselves provide access to
manager's planned targets for 3 months, subject to fulfillment
indicator of 25 projects at the same time.
3. Since it was not possible to directly obtain a solution from RBI, we proceed to
the formation of physical contradiction (FP) around the selected resource
( FP - a situation that occurs when a certain attribute
the object of interest to us must have two different meanings
at the same time to ensure the desired result [42]): errors in
recruitment of the base should lead to the correction of technology sales manager,
in order to reach the target indicators for 3 months, and errors in the selection of the base are not
lead to the correction of the manager’s sales technology, since the manager doesn’t
has sufficient skills to reflect errors that occur during recruitment
customer base .
Since the company that set this task has implemented an adaptation system
sales staff, it was easy to take control of the mentor process
recruitment of the base of projects to newly arrived managers and to carry out its reflection
first, 2 times a week, then - 1 time per week, then 1 time in 2 weeks,
thereby making his mistakes a resource for correcting further work. Similar
reflection is carried out according to performance models developed for mentors
[16].
Page 43
43
After the formation of the FP, the solution involving this resource turned out to be
the obvious is managing the employee’s reflection process in the process
initial set of customer base.
Roadmap for working with the operational zone in the organizational
management tasks
• Formulate a pair of TP;
• Determine the operating TP (TP1 or TP2);
• Select the conflicting pair in the working TP;
• Highlight the operational area, additionally defining the interaction environment
tools and products (the operational area consists of a “tool”,
carrying out harmful effects and “products” perceiving
harmful effects [3]);
• Allocate the resources of the operational area as factors, in a significant way
affecting the tool and product and determine their priority if resources
a lot of.
• Formulate a RBI rule.
• Substitute resources in the RBI rule instead of the X-element. If the decision is not
obtained at this stage, then form around the selected resource
physical contradiction (we act in the logic of ARIZ).
Page 44
44
Conclusion: conclusions and recommendations
The effectiveness of the proposed methods
The effectiveness of the proposed methods is practically confirmed:
1. Schematization - the tool is used in more than 30 projects;
2. Formulation of the operational area in management tasks - in more than 30
projects.
These tools are included in the training program implemented by the author in full-time
format and format of the online workshop. 200 online training programs trained
people, according to the full-time program - about 150 people. During the training, students
(students are company specialists) carry out projects in the field of their
activities and protect projects based on learning outcomes.
Scope and limitations of the proposed methods
The author assumes the use of these techniques to solve organizational
management tasks set in any organized social systems.
These tools may only be used provided that
the solver owns the subject of research, or interacts closely with
specialists with the required subject competencies in the field of
strategic and regular management, marketing, sales, financial
planning, psychology, etc. [2], [13], [23].
The author’s practice shows that the greatest efficiency in application
tools can be achieved in team mode, if the work
teams are effectively supported by flexible project management tools,
First of all, Scrum technology [26].
The author's recommendation for use in organizational and managerial tasks:
1. Always apply schematization to the full clarification of inventive
situations subject to the use of TRIZ in organizational and managerial
tasks;
2. Apply the method of formulating the operational area and working with resources
of the operational zone proposed by the author only if
formulating a TP pair, the solution is not obvious and the solver expressed a desire
continue to move in the logic of ARIZ.
Page 45
45
The possibility of further development of techniques
The author believes that TRIZ specialists should take a closer look at
G.P. Shchedrovitsky [10], [41] and study the application of categories of systems,
proposed by the author, for a more accurate and quick description of inventive
situation.
A special methodological study requires the category of "layer", as well as
“Generalized object” and “filling”, practical recommendations for more
the conscious use of these concepts in solving organizational
management tasks. The author believes that in this direction it is worth continuing
research.
The author believes that the proposed description of the operational area is not
final. The author believes that it is necessary to develop a special
methodological language for the description of the tool, product and, in particular, their environment
interactions . As a result of this description, the allocation of operational resources
zones can be much more accurate, therefore, will give even more interesting
practical results.
The development of criteria according to
with which the solver can make a detailed analysis of the resources of the operational zone.
The use of TRIZ for organizational and managerial tasks today
a day far from established discipline, there is a significant
research work.
Page 46
46
ANNEX 1
An example of using schematization for analyzing inventive
situations in conjunction with S-curve analysis.
Objective: to increase staff productivity and reduce time costs
the first person of the company through a change in the employee motivation system. Note: in
This example does not show the final solution to the problem, it is demonstrated
exclusively an analysis of the inventive situation.
Tasks: pyrotechnic company "Fast and the Furious", St. Petersburg.
From fig. 13 shows that during the existence of the company, the author changed three
motivational models with which he inspired his close-knit team.
As the MPV (main parameter of value) adopted "employee productivity",
expressed in the number of operations per shift with the required level
quality . Since the concept of “operation” is predetermined, and the operations themselves
reflected in the technological maps that are compiled for each event,
perform a performance calculation and determine the level of quality of performance
work is easy.
Fig. 16. Change of various motivation systems in the company.
We describe the motivation system shown in Fig. 16:
Curve No. 1 - at the beginning of the existence of the company, in the late 90s - for the promotion
It was considered to be arranged in an organization where there is a normal social package,
stable salary and healthy relationships in the team. At the beginning of this approach
perfectly stimulated employees to work, compared with others not quite
"White" companies. But over time, the "white package" began to be accepted as the norm, and
stability was no longer a motivating factor, but perceived as
due.
Performance
employees
Page 47
47
Curve No. 2 - the company introduced a system of cash bonuses. She gave
tangible
growth
performance
and
responsibility
but
then
performance declined. Previous bonuses were no longer available for motivation
to work. Numerous studies have been conducted on the effect of money on motivation,
of which it is known that the award is perceived by the employee as a motivator approximately
three months, after which he begins to take it for granted. According to the findings
S. Covey [30], money for business is like air, without them the company cannot work
can, and the employees quit. However, for life, a person needs not only
breathe. Therefore, such a system has very limited resources for its
application.
Curve No. 3 - a decision was made to develop an intangible system
encouragement, which would be based on their own moral and ethical values
employees who must match the values ​​of the founder of the company, given
requirements of the pyramid of needs A. Maslow [31]. Today the system is in
the beginning of this curve, and according to the director’s forecasts, it will give a smoother, but
steady and continuous growth of labor productivity and personal
responsibility of employees, will spread its influence both on the selection of employees,
and on their retention. Naturally, the value motivation system is by no means
It does not cancel the system of monetary incentives, it supplements it. Observations give
reason to believe that a value approach combined with a powerful system
training can give about a twofold increase in
selected MPV.
From fig. 16 shows that the studied system in this company is located in
the very beginning of the third S-curve, and therefore, all the main efforts of the leader
must be spent on tuning the system - you need to create such conditions that
the system began to work steadily. There are no other priorities at this stage.
Now you need to set tasks, for which it is proposed to parse the system in
the form in which it exists now, and then determine the desired parameters
system, its future configuration ( Fig. 16 shows that the transition to the third
the curve in the company has just occurred while substantial
value shift in the minds of employees takes time and does not occur
instantly ).
To describe the current inventive situation, we apply
schematization:
Page 48
48
Fig. 17. The use of schematization for the analysis of an inventive situation.
Since we resorted to schematization after applying the analysis on S-
curve, we got some new knowledge. From fig. 16 we see that introduced
the bonus system (curve 2) was implemented quite successfully, which resulted in
MPV growth, although the system reached its saturation quite quickly.
Naturally, in the diagram (Fig. 17) we fixed the structure of this system in a section
"It was".
Then there was a transition to curve 3 (Fig. 16) as a more promising
naturally, with the preservation of the bonus, that is, between the two curves occurred
continuity . If the company didn’t do this, then the transition occurred
there would be a significant "drawdown" of MPV (Fig. 16). Yes and no cash reward
Motivation systems have no prospects, any normal leader knows this.
In addition, the company determined the position of the new motivation system at S-
curve - this is stage I (Fig. 16). In accordance with the objectives of the first stage, we say not
as much about efficiency, how much about the potential of the system and its minimum
health. Therefore, in the diagram in Fig. 17 we depict the structure based on
assigned tasks: to ensure the minimum performance of the new system
motivation, but taking into account its configuration (at the heart of the system proposed
task manager, the pyramid of needs A. Maslow). The author does not consider the pyramid
A. Maslow is an exceptionally correct model, but to describe the current situation, she
perfect - over the years of work in this company, employees have "grown" from the point
view of values ​​and the pyramid of A. Maslow it simply and reliably demonstrates.
Carrying out the analysis of the circuit in Fig. 17, we found unwanted effects
(NE) and recorded them in the table:
No. Condition of elements
existing
system, "It was"
Item Status
new system
Tasks
No.
NJJ Description
one
Prize
distributed
directively
the director
Premium distributed
collective according
contribution
SJS 1
Grievances and their hidden
conflicts
SJ 2
Manipulation of employees in relation
to colleagues
Page 49
49
2
Staging
detailed
strictly defined
SMART tasks
Outlining frames
statement of general tasks
and setting constraints
employees themselves
SJS 3
Recently arrived employees cannot
work in this mode, since they don’t
lack of knowledge
SJS 4
Distracting experienced staff for
control tasks less
experienced
Transition to a single environment
planning
for example to flexible
design system
management for small
teams - SCRUM
SJ 5
Regular weekly planning
takes extra time, usually -
2 ... 3 hours a week.
SJ 6
Irritation from repetitive operations
planning, team briefings, etc. →
decreased attention, attitude to the system
planning as an unnecessary load
four
Employee values
at level 1-2 in A.
Maslow
Mature employees
having values ​​3-4
A. Maslow level
SJF 7
Often, such employees want to open their
business, so they leave the company
SJ 8
Such employees have their own
opinion on working matters with them
need to agree. Manage such
people - it’s the same as grazing cats.
SJ 9
Need to maintain interest in
all areas of motivation - money,
emotions, intelligence, meaning and contribution to
a society that requires significant
efforts from the director / owner
SJS 10
Such an employee has versatile
interests, not the fact that manufacturing
tasks will be paramount for him
5
Primary control
carried out by the director
Director carries out
general control
indicators, control
quality operations
do it yourself
employees
SJ 11
With the loss of workplace value for
employee risk of deterioration
quality of operations, which
may go unnoticed
SJ 12
Even when an employee sincerely tries,
he is subject to the factor
eyes ", that is, simply does not see
own flaws that are easy
see from the side. However external
detailed control abolished.
The selection of NE in the analysis of the circuit in Fig. 17.
Thus, 12 tasks were set, the solution of which can provide
working capacity
selected
the system
motivation
staff.
Analysis
inventive situation allowed to quickly identify and formulate 12
specific tasks, which would be difficult without using a system
approach, given the fact that the selected system is at stage I of development according to S-
figurative curve and did not pass approbation.
It was decided to introduce a motivation system taking into account the implementation of the found
solutions to the tasks given in the table.
Page 50
fifty
APPENDIX 2
The task was set by the director of one company as follows: how
register business processes independently, without complicated terminology and unnecessary
paperwork? It was required to give a minimal template that would allow
perform work on the description of the company's business processes so as not to produce
unnecessary information. It would not happen that the developed business processes
would slow down the company, deprived of its required dynamics. At the same time, work on
the intuition, as before, is no longer possible, the young company was faced with the first
growth disease. The company faced a serious controversy.
A lot of literature is available on how to prescribe business processes. But almost
it is not indicated anywhere how recommendations for describing business processes in
depending on what stage the company is at. And even if such
There are recommendations; they are quite heavy and bulky. We set the task to give
capacious and accurate recommendations, differentiated for different stages of development
business, which will answer exactly the question: what model
Need to prescribe business processes for this particular company ?
We apply the system operator in order to better understand the system by
Description of the company's business processes. The structure of the system operator is shown in
fig. 3 in the main part of the dissertation.
System Operator:
1) PRESENT.
1.1. The investigated system: business processes.
The system of business processes, special attention to cross-cutting business processes (affecting
work of 2 or more departments or groups). Process flexibility.
Quote: “Most companies are organized according to a functional principle, but they
should work in conditions of interfunctional interaction. ... processes
break the hierarchical structure. "
1.2. Supersystem
Strategic management, balanced scorecard. Horizontal
employee interaction. Quality management system - as a methodology. Market,
competitors. The dynamics of the environment. Changes to the law.
Quote: “From the point of view of the process approach, the organization appears as a set
processes. The management of such an organization is based on process management.
Each process has its own goal, which is its criterion.
effectiveness. The goals of all processes are lower level goals, through
the implementation of which top-level goals are achieved - the goals of the company. ”
Page 51
51
1.3. Subsystems:
Business process system (model), responsibility management, management
personnel, process regulation, personnel reporting, process automation,
process performance management.
2) PAST 30s 20th century.
1.1.
System:
A person in the workplace, instructions of managers (namely “instructions”).
A.K. Gastev focused on the human factor. He believed that the main thing
the role in the work of the enterprise is played by man. Quote: “organizational effectiveness
begins with the personal effectiveness of each person in the workplace, in particular
with the efficient use of time ”(development of a description technique
production processes at this time is primarily associated with the name of this
wonderful person).
The most important problem, according to A.K. Gastev, there was an inability of a working man
obey, work in a team and strictly follow the instructions of the leaders.
1.2.
Supersystem
The survivals of the agricultural system, industrialization, leadership, production pace.
Rigid hierarchical structure in the enterprise.
A.K. Gastev noted that “workers do not know how to keep a single production pace
and work as well as their European counterparts do. Way of life
peasant Russia without rich European working traditions. ”
1.3.
Subsystems:
Workplace; Personal qualities: a sense of time, personal efficiency at work
place, the ability to obey.
A.K. Gastev emphasized that “Russian workers lack a sense of time.
Russia, in which the workers are former serfs who went to the free
bread, this way of life did not initially contribute to the acquisition of the European "installation on
time".
3) THE PAST 70-80s. 20th century.
3.1. System:
SADT standard (Structured Analysis and Design Technique ), functional methodology
Simulation IDEF0 (Integration Definition For Function Modeling) .
One of the best-known methodologies for describing organizations as organizational-
technical systems, has become the methodology of structural analysis and design
SADT systems (Structured Analysis and Design Technique ). It was developed
Page 52
52
American Douglas Ross (D. Ross) in 1973. Particularly widespread use
received one of the SADT subsets - functional modeling methodology
IDEF0 (Integration Definition For Function Modeling ). The initiator of its development
and further standardization was the US Department of Defense. Methodology
IDEF0 was successfully used in military, commercial organizations to solve
a wide range of tasks (from software development for defense
systems prior to the development of logistics and management systems
finance). Availability and experience of using IDEF0 in various subject areas
areas, along with growing computer support, made it even more affordable
in use. This, in turn, also led to the widespread use of IDEF0
as a methodology for describing the business processes of organizations. In many ways, the popularity
functional modeling methodology IDEF0 due to the ease of notation,
the main elements of which are the function block and arrow.
Also in the USSR at the beginning of the 70s, an Integrated Management System was introduced in the USSR
product quality (CC UKP) . Management was based on the logic of mass
production, economies of scale, centralized control, and also resulting
low rate of change and a rapid loss of relevance.
The control system inherited from the USSR is based on the concept of mass
production, which dominated the entire national economy. The main purpose of this
systems - get the economic effect of the growth of production. Than
the larger the volume of production, the lower the cost per unit of output. At
it’s easier to standardize and unify processes, and also easier
carry out centralized control. Such a system allowed to produce
a huge amount of TRU (goods, works, services), but in order to change something
had to spend a huge amount of resources due to lack of flexibility
in management and processes. As a result, it turned out that in the international arena, our
enterprises were uncompetitive due to lack of flexibility and
the inability to quickly adapt to the needs of the market.
3.2 Supersystem:
Strategic management, balanced scorecard. System
quality management. Competitors, market ... Relative stability, gradual,
smooth change of scenery (a significant difference from the NS "Real" ). Acting
legislation.
3.3 Subsystems:
IDEF0 Principles, Process Diagrams, Process Performance Management, System
business processes (model), responsibility management, personnel management,
process regulation, staff reporting.
4) FUTURE.
1.1. System:
Flexible business process cards integrated into CRM systems and more
high level (ERP).
Page 53
53
1.2. Supersystem
Self-developing business (company), further development of LEAN, CRM-system, ERP-
systems with integration of machine learning algorithms, BigData, distributed
registries.
1.3. Subsystem:
Instant access to self-updating information. Flexible business process system
(model), responsibility management, personnel management, regulation
processes, automatic reporting by indicators, flexible management
process efficiency. Automation, robotization, competency development system,
knowledge management.
From the analysis of the system using the system operator, we can distinguish
following:
1. Subsystems: Quick access to information. Business Process System (model),
responsibility management, personnel management, process regulation,
personnel reporting, process automation, performance management
processes. We see that business processes must be able to quickly
be extracted from the information environment, have high flexibility, have
reference points that show what will change in the supersystem when changing
business process at the level of a specific position.
2. Strategic management, balanced scorecard. Lean
production,
system
management
quality.
Market,
competition...
Relative stability, gradual, smooth change of scenery
( significant difference from the NS "Real" ). Current legislature.
When designing business processes, a system should be developed
indicators: KPI (key performance indicators) and managerial
indicators by which we track the effectiveness of achieving KPI.
The future shows us that business processes should be included with
knowledge management system, that is, a system should be developed
indicators tied to a competency model. Provide here
no gap! Automatic collection of statistics on indicators
special attention should be paid, to develop a culture of working with numbers,
gradually preparing the control system for the application of methods
machine learning in the future.
3. The human factor significantly affects performance and efficiency
processes. Therefore, when the responsibility matrix is ​​prescribed, the functional
defined, it is necessary to select people in a team with psychological and
competency portrait suitable for the position. Otherwise,
no one guarantees that the processes will work correctly and be fully implemented
volume.
It follows that business processes should not only be tied to
knowledge management system, but also with the profile of the position, which, in general,
is logical.
4. Take into account that the sense of time in humans has evolved since AK. Gastev, but
still far from ideal, so business processes should be
Automated in a CRM system with automatic notification, but in
in any case, before preparing the ToR for CRM, which ultimately will get
BP description, a paper document is created.
It’s important to consider that trying to regulate everything in a row is silly, but in
small companies, such attention to administration is fraught with loss
Page 54
54
business. Therefore, before the regulation of processes should be determined
company position on the S-curve (most conveniently according to I. Adizes) and based on this
set the “scale” of regulation, that is, determine the extent
detailing the process. It is also important to determine the degree of freedom of acceptance.
employee decisions in changing business processes in order to increase them
effectiveness. As stated above, allow for
operational process change, but with setting markers, which of
Related processes will be involuntarily affected. Should provide
differentiation of access rights to change processes.
5. Studying the success of IDEF0 shows us that for presenting business processes
you should try to get as far away as possible from text instructions in favor of
charts - infographics, drawings with short explanations. If more is needed
detailed explanation, it can be given as a note to
corresponding paragraph of the infographic. Such instructions are perceived and
memorized much better, but there are pitfalls. Good
infographics - the best option in terms of perception of instructions
by the user, but she has a huge minus in that drawing circuits is very
expensive and long in time. Not all employees can do this.
Today, this problem is resolved. In 2016 - 2017, the present
boom in integrating graphical display of business processes in CRM-
systems according to IDEF0 recommendations. Hence it’s clear that it’s worth
pay attention to CRM-systems that have just such
opportunities and use them. It is important to consider monitoring for
indicators indicated above, differentiation of access rights, signaling by
reference points when making changes.
6. An integrated product quality management system (CS UKP) of the USSR may be
interesting only in the case of large-scale reengineering of business processes in
large corporations. In other cases, you should not contact her.
You should pay attention to the company’s standard for designations and
corpus of concepts. The corpus of concepts should be the same for everyone in the company and
as much as possible unified with the practice accepted in the world. "Translations" of terms
inside the company is too expensive. Therefore, together with the development
business processes should deal with the standard adopted by the company.
It’s better to immediately lay down standardized concepts and notation than later
spend a lot of time and effort to fix it.
7. When choosing a CRM system and a method for preparing a description of business processes
should take into account the rapid change in the environment, the system should be able to
make changes quickly, better - without the involvement of IT-specialists. Otherwise
case, the dynamics can be lost, and the PSU will turn into empty trash and
will stop working.
You should not engage in self-written programs, but use ready-made ones
expandable systems to provide the above
functions.
8. When describing the BP should take into account the interaction between units. Exactly
at the junction of departments there is the greatest defect in communications, distortion
information and various kinds of failures.
Recommendations - see above. Optional: when determining a personality profile
a specific unit should not be considered in isolation, but viewed in
together with departments and process owners with which business processes
intertwined most closely. The problem is solved at the level of generalized objects,
do not go into filling properties (see recommendations for schematization)!
9. In the future, the impact of IT technology will increase, so the final product will be
CRM-system with embedded PSU, giving hints in real time.
In the form of a list of documents BP will exist only at the time of implementation, in
quality of project documentation. Next is only the electronic format.
Pay attention to software manufacturers focusing on
issue of tips and statistics increased attention.
Page 55
55
As a result of the analysis of data concentrated in the system operator,
a matrix for the implementation of a system for describing business processes depending on
the stage of development of the company, the author has not met analogues of this matrix in any
specialized literature, nor in their practical activities (stages
development are given in lines according to I. Adizes [13]). The columns are informational
blocks required in the description of business processes for each stage:
Designations and abbreviations:
+ ... +++ - the degree of detail of the documentation;
Business Processes (BP)
Organizational Structure (Organ.)
Job Description (CI)
Reporting (Report)
Regulations (P)
Standards Management (Ex. Art.)
Compliance Monitoring Standards (CIS)
Page 56
56
Performers in the description of business processes:
Designations and abbreviations:
"-" absent;
C - himself;
K - team;
Co - consultant (expert).
Case shows that using the system operator provides interesting
results in solving organizational and management problems, but more suitable
to find strategic decisions .
When solving situational organizational and managerial tasks, application
schematization makes it possible to more accurately analyze inventive
situation and set particular tasks, including by applying categories of layers and
generalized filling object.
It seems that this state of affairs outlines the scope
system operator and schematization to solve this class of problems.
Page 57
57
APPENDIX 3
A task:
A modern, fast-growing Chelyabinsk IT company developing
platform solutions for working with digital content using
artificial intelligence (number of staff: approx. 200 people), repeatedly changed
their structure, trying to find a balance between the structure, which are based
departments (marketing, finance and accounting, several development departments, broken
competencies) and the structure based on project teams,
including a variety of specialists, depending on the objectives of the project.
The company faced several inconsistencies, one of which
consisted of the following:
Fig. 18. A pair of TAs related to the organizational structure of an IT company.
Contradiction analysis:
TP1. In order to optimize the loading of specialists, the basis of the structure
companies should have departments (unit units), as the head
unit determines how much time one employee needs to
one or another project and, since he owns information about all projects, he
can optimize the work of the employees of his department. That is, loading
unit specialists are optimized as there is a centralized
work planning by an experienced specialist (department head), who
sets tasks to department specialists and monitors their implementation .
TP2. In order for specialists to better understand the nuances of the project, they must be
completely involved in it, that is, belong to one or another project team,
since discussions of all the nuances of the project take place in the presence of the project
teams, and at all stages of the project - from the inception and appearance of MVP (minimum
viable product - the minimum viable product) [32] to obtain a full-fledged
market product, that is, they take part in the discussion of all the nuances
project in all its stages .
Page 58
58
Combining new entities with opposing states of the system on
fig. eighteen:
1. Is it possible to make the project team at the heart of the structure?
the company had a single coordinating center for competencies, which would put
tasks for subject specialists belonging to different teams, and
would control the execution of tasks?
Here came the idea of ​​applying flexible principles of project management at the level of
the whole company, that is, with a built-in system for recording time and project indicators.
Agencies supporting flexible planning principles exist (Agile and SCRUM
[26]), while allowing you to shoot high-quality analytics (such as Asana [33],
eg). At the same time, the top management of the company gets a special,
a guiding and inspiring role; much attention needs to be paid
continuous training of staff, especially project managers, to which
special requirements.
Conclusion: a flexible planning system with integrated performance monitoring
accept, but completely reorient the company to "confederation"
project teams - a risky strategy.
2. Is it possible to make departments remain at the core of the structure, but their
experts would take part in the discussion of projects not occasionally, but
constantly, at all stages of the project with a wide range of
specialists involved?
Here came the idea of ​​creating a “managerial club” within the company, members
which meets at least 1 time per week and discusses projects in
development in the company. In addition, “design circles” have been created that are not found
less than 1 time per week, in which all specialists involved in
this particular project.
Management Club and Project Clubs are supported by flexible methods
planning and related tools.
This solution is partially implemented; full implementation in the company's practice
planned for 2018.
Transformations in the company for 2018:
• We create a unified system for assessing the success and contribution of the project and
resource allocation.
• We introduce a flexible methodology in which company employees participate in
project level.
• The previously adopted structure of the company, based on which unit-
units from which resources are drawn into projects.
• A set of measures is being developed, according to which, employees will
involved in the product life cycle.
• Developing practices of the “Management Club”.
• “Project circles” are being created.
Page 59
59
APPENDIX 4
A task.
Find a market way to get the company out of the crisis (company “X” takes
about 10% of the Russian market, while being the second producer in the Russian Federation by market share).
The crisis is generated by the actions of a more powerful competitor, occupying a leading
position in the Russian market and owning a share of more than 50% of the market.
The main objective of the project (after conducting a preliminary analysis): how
increase the number of branches and managers without resorting to attracting
a significant amount of credit?
The main results.
Found an organizational solution that will allow the company to successfully
compete with a more powerful target competitor without borrowing
cash, as well as without changing the main product line, that is
exclusively in a market way, which was the main requirement of the customer.
Introduction
Company "X" is a manufacturer of concrete additives, takes 2nd place in
market share of the Russian Federation, occupying a little more than 10% of the Russian market. Main competitor
company X occupies more than 50% of the Russian market share, and its share continues to grow,
and the market share of company “X”, on the contrary, shows a steady decline.
Market analysis of concrete products and ready-mixed concrete in Russia, as well as volume analysis
cement production in the Russian Federation (indirect indicator) shows that sales decline
company "X" in the last two years can not be caused by the fall of the target market
customers - manufacturers of ready-mixed concrete and reinforced concrete products (see market analysis). As
source data of the analysis used data obtained by the analytical department
company "X" (see. Fig. 19).
An analysis of the products of company “X” and its main competitor revealed a complete
similarities in the composition and quality of products of these two firms, and the survey data
target customer groups show even slight excess
product quality of the company "X" in comparison with the product of the main competitor.
It should be noted that there is a promising direction in the market of concrete additives
- polycarboxylates. These are more advanced supplements that allow for much
lower concentration give more stable properties of concrete. Manufacturers
such additives are foreign companies. But neither company "X" nor its main competitor
does not produce such additives, moreover, their market is still small, despite
undoubted perspective.
Product comparison data provided by the analytical department
company "X", a survey of target customer groups conducted by us.
Product cost analysis also showed full compliance with the proposal.
company "X" and its main competitor.
Page 60
60
Thus, by exclusion, we can conclude that the main
the difference is in customer service , which means we are dealing not with technical, but with
organizational and management task.
Since we are talking about the B2B market, then studying market promotion, first
the turn should be paid to sales managers [27]. Study
in the form of a customer survey showed that the average qualifications of managers of both
companies are at the same level. At the same time, customer focus
managers “X” marked by customers as much higher compared to
the main competitor, while the share of company “X” continues to fall amid growth
market share of a key competitor.
In quantitative terms, there is a huge difference - the number
managers in company X is about 6 times lower than the number of managers in
company "Y". The situation is similar with the number of branches - the number of branches
Company X is 5 times lower than its main competitor. Needless to say
that the management of company "X" is well aware of this quantitative
dissonance, however, only after this comparative analysis became
it is clear that the size of the company, and therefore a multiple difference in financial
opportunities - the only reason for the stable loss of the market by the company "X" on
the background of the growing market at the time of solving this problem .
Maintain a larger staff of managers and branches does not seem
possible - not enough money. Financial Opportunities for X and Its
main competitor is almost an order of magnitude different.
Hence the main objective of the project: how to increase the number of
branches and managers, without resorting to attract a significant amount
loan funds ?
Subtask: it is desirable to make sure that the competitor could not copy
this decision .
Immersion in the task. MARKET ANALYSIS 2007 - 2012.
Charts are based on data provided by company analysts.
"X."
Page 61
61
Fig. 19. Analysis of the Russian market of cement and ready-mixed concrete.
As can be seen from the above diagrams, the market for ready-mixed concrete and cement after
overcoming the crisis of 2008 - 2009 growing steadily.
Analysis of the sales of company “X” and its most dangerous competitor 2007 -
2012.
According to the end of 2012, in the Russian market of additives for production
ready-mixed concrete the following situation has developed: the main market share is
the main competitor of the company “X” (it owns more than 50% of this market),
the second place is occupied by company “X” (about 10%) of the market, followed by other players.
The diagrams are removed from the example for obvious reasons. The diagrams show that
Y sales are growing amid a growing market for precast concrete and ready-mixed concrete.
Sales of the company “X” are falling against the backdrop of a growing market for precast concrete and ready-mixed concrete, and
also amid growing sales of the main competitor. Gradually picture
develops. But while there is no clarity - is it the sales or the product itself?
Analysis of the product offer of company "X"
A comparative analysis of the product is not given here in view of its significant
volume.
Comparative analysis performed by specialists of the company “X” and a survey
customers, showed full compliance with the products of the company "X" and its main
competitor, and the survey revealed that the quality of the product of company "X" is negligible
superior to the quality of the product of its main competitor in the parameter "dosage" -
that is, a number of products of the company "X" makes it possible to obtain the desired effect
at lower dosages.
The analysis shows that:
product quality indicators of both companies are on the same level
(the conclusion was made on the basis of a study by specialists of the company “X” and a survey
customers).
Page 62
62
the range of products is completely identical, moreover
promising additives - polycarboxylates - none of the studied
companies.
Key market indicators - production of concrete products, ready-mixed concrete and cement
As of the end of 2012, they are showing steady growth.
The market share of the main competitor of the company is growing steadily.
The market share of company “X” is steadily declining.
As stated above, the only significant difference is
market activity of companies: the number of managers and branches of company “X”
less than 6 times than its main competitor.
The problem is that you need to align the number of branches and
managers between competitors, for which you need to increase staff and number
affiliates about 5 times. However, this is impossible due to lack of funds, and
gap in financial capabilities of company “X” and its main competitor
constantly growing.
A key contradiction arises between the need to increase the number of
branches and managers and the inability to do this due to lack of funds:
Fig. 20. A pair of TP in this task.
Working TP isolated from fig. 18: affiliates and managers should be
much to provide the required consumer coverage, but it will require the company
investing a significant amount of cash, which is unacceptable.
Comment: The branch in this task is not just representation
company. The peculiarity of this business is that most
consumers prefers to receive the supplement in liquid form, however, the properties
liquid additives are quickly lost, so each branch is a
a small production site with an additive dilution unit. One such
the node is able to reliably supply consumers in a radius of about 250 km, not
Page 63
63
more. Of course, one node is not enough - you need to have staff
managers and technologists involved in the sale and subsequent implementation
additives in the enterprise customers. Therefore, each branch should be endowed
functions of production and product promotion. It turns out to work with
consumers, we need branches with production functions and managers,
carrying out the function of sale. But to keep up with a competitor, you need
significant cash .
Operational Zone (OZ). The conflict area in this task is between
a large number of branches and managers of the company "X" and a small number
branches and managers of the company "Y".
In fact, a conflict arises between great financial opportunities
company “Y” and small opportunities of company “X”, processing the market
(of the same consumers).
Fig. 21. The operational area (OZ).
OZ Resources :
Tool: market supply of companies (preliminary analysis
revealed the identity of the proposals of both companies)
Product: final consumers (precast concrete plants and manufacturers of commodity
concrete), traders (resellers).
Let's try to transfer the branch function to other elements of the system, first
the queue - to the health resources.
RBI-1 to OZ resources: The final consumer carries the functions
branch.
The customer has already tried this strategy - but enterprises with
a competitor’s branch, they are not going to bear the costs for the performance of this function -
Largely due to this market strategy, business X collapses, although products
Company Y
Company X
Final
Consumers
Traders
Page 64
64
identical and even somewhat superior in stability to the properties of a competitor, about which
said above. This is a dead end.
RBI-1: The trader himself carries the functions of a branch. The customer objects to
of this formulation of RBIs: a trader is only a reseller, a reseller. He doesn't care
what to make money on. Nevertheless, we recorded that a trader is a possible
source of funding, however, like the plant. But there is a difference between them -
the trader needs to do business in the region with numerous customers, and the plant -
have the most convenient supplier.
RBI-2: Traders, working on large logistics sites throughout
Territories of the Russian Federation themselves ensure the impossibility of further development of a competitor
company "X".
Then the problem arose in a new formulation: how to make it so that
more Y will open branches and the more hiring managers, the company X
will be better? - that is, at this stage the acceptance of TP authorization “surfaced”
No. 22 - to turn harm in favor.
In general, such a statement of the problem removes the fear that the competitor will repeat
the decision of the company "X". After all, the more it repeats, the more it will "stoke"
by myself.
From the course of strategic marketing it is known that such a task
is interpreted by the expression "you need to find a competitor’s weakness in his strength", i.e. what
need to do something that Y can't repeat? (in other words, cannot
abandon his own strategy and therefore will "drown" himself).
And here the RBI “works”: the trader himself carries the functions of a branch .
Solution Idea:
You need to turn the trader (reseller) into a full-fledged distributor,
for whom technological customer support is part of his business, and
creation of a logistics platform - an object of investment of a partner of company “X” with
predicted payback period.
To implement this solution, company X will need to guarantee
exclusive to one or two partners in the specified territory for the billing period
time (the question now comes down to calculating the payback period plus - the time when
distributor makes a profit; this period is, after all, a subject
negotiations of the parties);
Provide training to distributor technologists, transfer to distributor
technology to work with end customers, to provide an opportunity to represent interests
enterprises in a given territory (franchise).
Verification of the solution found.
Is the original contradiction allowed? Yes. Even a superficial analysis
shows that funds are required several times less than for opening
own branches, while the number of managers at the traders is enough for
Page 65
65
elaboration of category B and part C clients. Category A clients may
worked out by the company "X" with the subsequent transfer to the trader.
Checking the decision on the impossibility of repetition by the main competitor:
The competitor has already opened more than 30 branches - in all significant regions. For
repeating the strategy he will either have to close the branches in which they are invested
funds, or compete with your own distributors in
regions! Distributors will not accept such conditions. Therefore, the implementation of this
a strategy for a competitor of company "X" will be difficult - this is the weakness
competitor, concluded in his strength. The decision was received completely on organizational-
managerial level, as required by the customer at the stage of setting the task.
(!) It is interesting that before solving the problem using TRIZ company
periodically raised the task of developing traders in order to increase
sales. However, the company's specialists have not previously seen a tool in traders
resolving this contradiction and did not try to develop a strategy
development of a full distribution network. Just earlier management
the company did not set a task like that .
Page 66
66
APPENDIX 5
Cross-cutting case demonstrating joint use
schematization and work with contradictions on the proposed
authored circuits .
A system consisting of:
sales department of an industrial enterprise,
manufacturing tooling from heat-resistant steels, presented
head of sales, sales staff and the current system
sales (Fig. 12).
The essence of the problem: the head of sales (ROP) implements a new sales system,
having advantages over the previous one in terms of depth of study
customers and, as a result, allowing to increase the average amount of the contract and
conversion, however, managers resist and are in no hurry to leave the “beaten”
rails. "
Required: to make managers use only the tools of the new system
sales in their activities (as the task sounded in the original formulation, that in
the process of analyzing the circuit turned out to be not quite the correct goal setting - see table).
Below, we compose a model of a functioning system, presented in the form of a diagram.
The process of constructing a circuit for this task is described above (see explanations for Fig. 6):
Fig. 12 (repetition). Scheme of an inventive situation in the problem of changing the system
sales.
Page 67
67
The tasks set according to the scheme (Fig. 12) using the categories of schematization:
No.
Object of analysis in
IFS
Tasks
No.
A task
one
interaction
the system
(dotted line) with
elements
supersystems
1.1.
CRM system. The conflict arose largely due to the fact that the existing CRM system
not adapted to the requirements of the new sales system, which creates significant
inconvenience → how to make the CRM system meet the requirements
new sales system and supported it?
1.2
end-to-end business processes. The new sales system is changing end-to-end business processes,
this is especially true in collaboration with the design department and
production → you need to configure end-to-end processes so that
The requirements of the new sales system were provided .
1.3.
customers. The new sales system increases the time to contact
by the customer → how to make the depth of the customers' work increase without
increase time managers?
2
Layers
2.1
The implemented sales system manages the actions of managers, imposing on them
specific requirements → How to make sales system requirements
performed, but did the managers spend as little effort as possible?
2.2
Managers are faced with the fact that for a number of clients the requirements of the new system
redundant, which does not increase, but rather reduces efficiency ( from this point of view
managers "manage" the reaction of customers, hence the distribution of layers on
scheme ) → Differentiate customers and introduce a new sales system
only in relation to such client groups in which increase is expected
conversion and average transaction weight when using this system .
3
Communications
Partially analyzed in paragraphs 1 and 2, additionally:
3.1
Logical conflict between two systems, for example, the approach is completely changing
to identify needs, the stages of the transaction are radically different →
Compare the requirements of the existing and new systems, identify areas
similarities and cardinal discrepancies, disassemble into elementary steps of the area
cardinal differences, thereby simplifying the implementation (such a statement of the problem
allows the solver to rely on existing resources).
3.2
Communication defects ROP managers → Define metrics and reference points in
the new sales system, which should be feedback from
manager to leader. Simplify data retrieval by managers
reference points.
3.3
Establish a relationship CRM-system - ROP → Having solved the tasks 3.2, bring the CRM-system in
in accordance with the decisions received, make appropriate changes to
order of meetings, strengthening communication on reference points and
reducing communication on irrelevant moments.
four
Processes and
the functions
4.1
The task appeared after setting the task 1.2: to conduct a detailed analysis of business
processes between the sales department and the design department, as well as between
sales department and production department (pre-mapping
processes using BPMN notation) . Highlight bottlenecks and set targets for
to overcome them.
4.2.
After solving task 1.1, set the task to simplify the introduction of the required
data into the CRM system by entering patterns and rules.
5
Groups
5.1
Negative phenomena within a group of managers - the effect of the adoption of new
technologies according to the model of J. Moore → how to use innovators and early
followers as a resource to introduce a new sales system? how
to identify and neutralize the influence of “farther”?
5.2.
Customer groups, which follows from the analysis of the task 2.2. Carry out customer separation
on categories A, B and C. Define customer categories and target customer groups,
for which the new sales system is redundant. Set a task for synchronization
the work of the department, which should apply both sales systems, if a hypothesis
will be confirmed and the existing sales system will be advisable to maintain
for certain groups of customers amid the introduction of a new one.
6
Generalized
object and
filling
6.1.
Provide training for the “good middle peasants” of the new sales system after the decision
tasks from pp 1-5 and determine whether they have reached the level of "stars" after a given time.
If not, conduct a comparative analysis of the work of those and others and conduct further training
“Good middle peasants” according to the performance model (performance model
explains exactly what competencies make stars stars by comparing them
competencies with the competencies of "good average" in the team and identifying
discrepancies) .
Page 68
68
Next, we divide the subtasks into elementary actions that are necessary
implement on the project. If necessary, we indicate the tools that should be used in
further process this task. Also create unwanted effects
and contradictions, if any, arise during the course of the project.
No.
ass
aci
The task
No.
ass
en
and
I am
Task for execution /
further analysis
Secondary NE /
TP (draft)
1.1
How to make CRM-
the system matched
new system requirements
sales and supported her?
1.1.1
Carry out ABC analysis and describe portraits
customers by category in each channel
1.1.2. Organize a multi-funnel in CRM (process
and resultant) in money and quantities
NE: Manager mistakes during
funnel selection
1.1.3
Provide the ability to assign to one
deal several counterparties indicating
status and affiliation of the transaction in the card
the client
1.1.4
Provide the ability to assign
categories to deal and counterparty
1.1.5
Customize process and result reports
funnel according to TK
1.2
End-to-end configuration required
processes so that
new system requirements
sales were secured
1.2.1
Describe existing business processes
between designated departments in
BPMN notations and highlight points
inconsistencies of the current process with
requirements of the new sales system (after
solutions to problem 1.2.3) *
1.3
How to make depth
customer research
increased without increasing
time-consuming managers?
1.3.1
Develop standard decision making schemes
for priority sales channels indicating
customer entry points and tactics
categories A and B
NE: With 5 priority
channels - this is at least 10
circuits that still need
identify correctly.
1.3.2
Develop channel matrices
TP: many hypotheses
needs - more chance
create UTP but difficult
keep in mind
(need to reproduce
quickly in the conversation)
1.3.3
Develop rules for providing bonuses
to clients
TP: many bonuses –large
probability of getting into
need but choose
complicated.
1.3.4
Develop a base of typical questions at work
at different stages of the funnel
TP: a lot of questions - more
chance to create UTP but quickly
we will tire the client
2.1
How to make
sales system requirements
performed but managers
spent as little as possible
effort?
2.1.1
Provide CRM system with tips
2.1.2 CRM system itself pulls data from
customer portraits by average
2.1.3
Provide a description of the business process
manager for each stage
process and result funnel, highlight
areas of greatest time loss and
set tasks to eliminate them.
2.2
Differentiate
customers and introduce a new
sales system only
relation to such client
groups expected
increase conversion and
average deal weight at
application of this system
2.2.1
Retain existing sales system for
category C customers. Introduce a new system
sales only for customers of categories A and B.
TP: a contradiction in the choice
sales department work schemes
- both systems are implemented
all employees, or
differentiation is carried out?
Page 69
69
3.1
Compare requirements
existing and new systems,
identify areas of similarity and
cardinal discrepancy,
disassemble on
elementary area steps
cardinal differences
simplifying implementation
Partially solved in solving problems 1.3.2 -
1.3.4
3.1.1
The difference in actions at the stage of evaluating options:
create a list of typical selection criteria in
channels for target centers
decision-making (supplement the scheme with
solving problem 1.3.1)
NE: Managers forget
perform actions at the stage
evaluation options let
gravity process
3.1.2
Difference of actions: a new item was added -
economic justification. Give examples
(cases) payback calculations that
manager can use in preparation
commercial offers.
3.1.3
Stage work with objections replaced by stage
"Resolution of doubt", which causes
difficulties. Describe the background
doubt, manifestation
doubt, train to work with doubt.
NE: Managers often
miss occurrence
doubt centers acceptance
decisions even if
have been trained.
3.2
Define metrics and
reference points in the new
sales system by which
reverse should be carried out
communication from manager to
to the leader. Simplify
receiving data
reference managers
points.
3.2.1
Develop quantitative indicators in
funnel in the process and resultant funnels
3.2.2
Develop quality indicators in
sales funnel
NE: Difficulty of control
quality indicators in
sales funnel
3.2.3. Suggest application control options
data to the CRM system by managers
daily ( e-commerce facilities in
no company )
3.2.4
To provide for the formation in the CRM system
Lead from email manager and site
companies provide automatic accounting
leads.
NE: The risk of appearing in the database
data of the same
client under different
names
3.3
Make appropriate
changes in order
meetings reinforcing
reference communication
points and reducing
communication on
irrelevant moments
3.3.1
Create report in CRM-system “movement in
funnel for 1 week "for each
manager
4.1
Conduct a detailed analysis
business processes between
sales department and
design department, and
also between sales and
production department
Included in task 1.2.1
4.2
Set a task to simplify
entering the required data into
CRM system by entering patterns and
regulations
Tasks 1.1.1 - 1.1.5 and a number of other tasks
4.2.1
After completing tasks 1.1.1; 1.3.1-1.3.4
integrate these documents with
CRM system
5.1
How to use innovators and
early followers in
as a resource for implementation
new sales system? how
identify and
neutralize influence
“Bumpier”?
5.1.1
Create a report in the CRM system for use
its capabilities (which entities are actively
are used).
5.1.2
Provide a correlation report
Entity Use - Conversion -
average transaction weight - gross margin per month
(use data when conducting
meetings)
5.2
Set a task for
department work synchronization,
which should apply both
sales systems if hypothesis
confirmed and existing
the sales system will be
advisable to save for
Task 2.2.1
Page 70
70
specific customer groups
amid the introduction of a new
6.1
Provide training for “good
middle peasants "new system
sales after solving problems from
pp 1-5 and determine if achieved
whether they are the level of "stars" through
set time. If not,
conduct a comparative analysis
the work of both and spend
retraining “good
middle peasants "according to the model
performance
6.1.1
Create a performance model indicating
weighting factors on
positive deal outcome
TP: When using
no theoretical data
takes into account the specifics
enterprises but accounted for
new system requirements
sales, and if you take the data
by the enterprise then they
match the specifics, but
accumulated by
the requirements of the previous
sales systems
6.1.2
Observe the work of the "stars" and
refine the performance model
TP: If you watch for a long time, then
get an adequate model
performance but learn by
it doesn’t work right away. BUT
need to be taught immediately, otherwise
the system will not work.
6.1.3
Create a training program /
mentoring using data
obtained in the course of solving tasks 6.1.1 - 6.1.2
TP: mentoring program
must implement
best practice staff
but at the same time they come off
from core business
* in bold the table indicates tasks that require further analytical
work.
And there are 28 tasks for execution, of which 26 can be put to execution,
if you remove the selected unwanted effects (6) and resolve the contradictions,
formed at this stage in draft form (7), after which you can
finally formulate SMART execution tasks [14] and implement
planning, for example, using SCRUM technology [26]. That is, proceed to
"Managerial" part of the project.
2 more tasks require further analysis, for example, using notations
descriptions of business processes [34].
We highlight the contradictions in graphical form that we encountered (8 contradictions
arose at the stage of formulating tasks for execution, another 7 are secondary
unwanted effects that occur when trying to fulfill the set
tasks (transferring the remedy to the system). Execution tasks not containing
contradictions, are not included in the table, they will be fixed on the task board [26] and go
to work.
If the resolution of the contradiction is obvious, write it to the right in the table. If not, then
We expose the selected TPs to further analysis.
Tasks 1.2.1 and 2.1.3 will be further analyzed, as indicated above,
after which TRIZ tools can also be applied to them.
Page 71
71
No.
TP in graphical form
Authorization / Next Steps
1.1.2
-
one
+
When setting the trade category marker “C”
in the CRM system it is automatically offered
process funnel if marker is installed
“A” and “B” are the result.
Requirements taken into account
two systems
of sales
Funnel in CRM
Errors in
choosing
funnels
+
2
-
1.3.1
-
universal
+
It is solved when performing task 2.1.2, so
how typical schemes are provided
manager in the form of a hint CRM system
when setting a deal marker and channel
sales. Solution: make the channel marker
sales "active field.
Accuracy of description
the situation
Decision making schemes
Complexity
identification
scheme
+
Broken by channels and
categories
-
1.3.2
+
A lot of
-
Break down hypotheses by sales channels and
decision centers. In preparation
to the meeting use only the target
matrix, pre-selecting ~ 5
key hypotheses (empirical figure).
The target matrix is ​​output by analogy with
solved problem 1.3.1
Brighter and
reasoned
USP (unique
trade
sentence)
Hypotheses of needs
the client
Play
from memory during
dialogue with
by customer
-
Few
+
1.3.3
+
Many options
-
Bonus classification matrix: row by row
- classification by groups (financial,
logistics, consulting ...), by
columns - classification by authority:
Manager, Head of Sales
CEO.
Probability
to get in
need
Bonuses to customers
Complexity
of choice
_
Few options
+
1.3.4
+
A lot of
-
The contradiction is resolved by mentoring -
you need not to remember questions, but to learn
design them quickly with
using typical hypotheses
needs and criteria.
Brighter and
reasoned
USP (unique
trade
sentence)
Customer questions
Play
from memory during
dialogue with
by customer
-
Few
+
2.2.1
+
Differentiated by
sales patterns
-
We try to solve through analysis
TOC contradictions [12]
Optimal
using
qualifications
Department staff
of sales
amount
supported by
standards
-
All employees
apply both schemes
+
3.1.1
-
Single stage of work with
needs
+
Set marker in CRM system,
indicating the duration of stay on
each stage of the funnel depending on
correlation of the stage with the category of the transaction. At
exceeding the limit of being at the stage
"Need recognition" marker
signals manager about high
the probability of a change in stages.
Localization
work with
issues and
criteria
of choice
Sales funnel
Ease
identification
stages
+
Work with needs
beaten in 2 stages
-
3.1.3
+
Stage "permissions
doubt "
-
Let's try to solve using RBI and
resources [11] (previously acted on a hunch,
need to find reliable and easy
decision to identify doubts
Decision Centers)
Conformity
project realities
of sales
Sales funnel
Complexity
identification
-
Stage "work with
objections
+
3.2.2
-
Only quantitative
+
Bring quality indicators to
clear digital form (result -
identified at least 3 needs
leading to benefits not highlighted
less than 3 criteria leading to
benefits, etc.). Provide for
CRM-system markers, allowing to conduct
counting such indicators and display them in
special field in the transaction passport.
Adjustment
transaction movements
→ conversion
Funnel indicators
of sales
Complexity
extract
of information
+
Quantitative and
quality
-
Page 72
72
3.2.4
-
Manually
+
Lida approves in the CRM system only
marketing assistant. Also
assistant distributes leads for
further elaboration → required to enter
in a CRM system, a marker for the appearance of a lead,
notifying employee to whom
attached lead assistant department
marketing.
Lead Preservation
(guarantee that lead
not lost)
Leading in CRM-
the system
Possibility
appearance in the database
defective
records
+
Using
automatic services
-
6.1.1
+
Prepared from
using
experience
-
We try to solve through analysis
TOC contradictions [12]
Using
available data
on application
the system
Model
performance
Conformity
programs
learning
requirements
new system
-
Prepared from scratch
+
6.1.2
+
Based on
current understanding
-
We try to solve through analysis
TOC contradictions [12]
Preparation time
models (launch in
work)
Model
performance
Efficiency
learning
(impact
strictly to the point
growth)
-
Based on
form matching
the behavior of the middle peasants
with the stars
+
6.1.3
+
"Serednyachki" with experience
from 1 year
-
We try to solve through analysis
TOC contradictions [12]
Time of the best
employees on
performance
main
the activities
Who is conducting
training / mentoring
"Concentrate"
practical
skills
-
Best practics
+
So, straight away we managed to find solutions to 8 contradictions out of 13. The remaining 5 contradictions
We will allow by other means.
Resolution of the contradiction 2.2.1 (solved through analysis of TOC):
Fig. 22. Analysis of a pair of TP 2.2.1
Differentiated by
sales patterns
Number of supported
standards
Department staff
of sales
Apply both schemes
(no differentiation)
Optimal use
employee qualifications
+
-
+
-
Qualified transition does not occur
less skilled employees
work and vice versa
You need to have only one circuit
training new employees
Page 73
73
The branch “how to make employees differentiated by sales technology,
but at the same time we had only one scheme of employee training ”can be seen as
promising.
Solution : for the duration of the internship, the employee must be trained according to the program of work with
category C customers, and then, upon detection of potential, it can be transferred
to work with category A and B clients after retraining. In doing so, we
we get a single training system for sales staff, but differentiation by
sales patterns saved.
Super effect : gradual manifestation of employee potential, additional
motivation by complicating tasks with increasing income, reducing the number of unsuccessful
personnel decisions.
Resolution 3.1.3 (use resources and RBIs):
Fig. 23. The choice of working TP from a pair of TP 3.1.3.
Resources:
Stage of “resolving doubts”
(tool)
The process of identifying an “item”
processing (doubt) "- product
Approach to the contract
Personal communication with the adoption center
solutions
New large customer
Information from other stakeholders
Characteristics of the personality of the adoption center
solutions
Experience in similar transactions
Top Management Attention
Behavior Center Analysis
solutions
RBI rule:
The X-element itself provides an unmistakable identification of customer doubts (item
processing), significantly affecting the outcome of the transaction.
As a result of the substitution of resources in the RBI formula, we obtain the following:
1. When approaching the conclusion of a contract in the case of work with large transactions
the head of sales (ROP) takes the transaction under personal control;
Includes Stage
“Resolution of doubt”
Identification difficulty
“Subject of processing” (doubts
hard to detect)
Sales funnel
Includes the “work with
objections
Compliance with realities
project sales
+
-
+
-
Page 74
74
2. If the client has not worked with us before, a major transaction is planned,
we enter information about the personal qualities of the counterparty in the contact passport - type
individuals by DISC topology (or use the enneatype model by topology
Adizes-Madanes), interests, features of behavior. For briefing
managers detailed cases, examples are shown.
3. If the transaction is large, then at the stage of recognition of needs we study in detail
requirements of decision makers on this transaction. Special attention
we turn to this point if the transaction is significantly larger than those that were made with
this client earlier or the client switched from a competitor. Further, when
promoting the transaction, we fix deviations from the above requirements identified
deviations and will be reliable indicators of doubt.
4. If personal communication with the decision center is interrupted for a while
for objective reasons (the transaction goes to the stage where work
carried out with other decision centers (DPC), periodically
conduct personal communication with the CPR under various pretexts. Periodicity
contacts - at least 1 time per month.
5. Maintain information with persons influencing the decision and record
deviations from the current trajectory. In case of detection
significant deviations come in contact with the DPC.
6. Use the experience of similar transactions - on an extended monthly basis.
retrospective analysis of sales
to study the issue of identifying doubts arising in the most
material transactions.
Resolution of the contradiction 6.1.1.
A cursory analysis of the contradiction led to the understanding that express analysis by TOC is unlikely
will give a quality result. Therefore, we will resolve this contradiction with
allocation of resources of the operational area and the application of RBI.
Fig. 24. The choice of working TP from a pair of TP 6.1.1
Prepared from
using
experience gained
Program compliance
learning the requirements of the new
the system
Model
performance
Prepared “from a clean
sheet "
Using accumulated
statistics
+
-
+
-
Page 75
75
Resources:
Performance Model Preparation
“From scratch” - a tool
Using accumulated statistics
- product
Specification of behaviors
overlapping with existing
sales system
Accumulated Cases
Unique Form Specification
conduct
Cross-channel conversion data
of sales
Manager Reports
Documented Results
meetings
RBI rule:
X-element itself ensures the use of accumulated statistics in the model
performance designed for the new sales system.
As a result of the substitution of resources in the RBI formula, we obtain the following:
1. Describe behaviors in the performance model in relation to the new
sales system and highlight those forms of behavior that are similar to the previous
system. Use existing cases and accumulated experience when working out
“Intersecting” forms of behavior;
2. Analyze in channels where the conversion was above the average for transactions
categories A and B. Use the experience in these transactions as a reference
to verify the adequacy of the performance model created for the new
sales systems.
3. To analyze in channels where the conversion was below the average for category transactions
A and B. Put a thought experiment in the application of the performance model for
a new sales system for such transactions. Mark those forms
Behaviors experienced by experienced staff could correct the situation.
When training employees, pay special attention to the highlighted forms
behavior.
4. To check the adequacy of the conclusions in paragraphs 2 and 3, use the reports of managers and
meeting minutes created during the development of analyzed transactions.
5. Use data from manager reports and meeting minutes to
case studies when teaching selected forms of behavior (if the form
new behavior, then as a case, you can bring a situation where the presence
this form of behavior could have a qualitative impact on successful
transaction outcome).
Page 76
76
Resolution of the contradiction 6.1.2.
Fig. 25. Analysis of TP 6.1.2 pair and application of RBIs.
The application of RBI suggests itself:
RBI 6.1.2-1: the X-element itself ensures the selection of forms that are “not enough” by the middle peasants
behavior without a comparative analysis of the work of the "average" and "stars".
Solution : analysis of the situation by the "stars" themselves: if the "stars" hold a series of meetings
together with the "middle peasants", having on hand a common list of forms of behavior, then spending
subsequent reflection with the "stars" is easy to catch the difference. This operation is not
will require more than 1 week.
Based on
current understanding
Learning Effectiveness
(we act strictly on
growth points)
Model
performance
Based on
job comparisons
"Average" and "stars"
Model preparation time
+
-
+
-
Do not spend time on comparative
analysis of the work of the "average" and "stars" by
behaviors
We are not wasting development efforts
behaviors that
"Average" and so good
reproduce
RBI
Page 77
77
Resolution of the contradiction 6.1.3.
Fig. 26. Analysis of TP pair 6.1.3.
Both branches are recognized as dead ends, no solution found.
We try through resources and RBI:
Fig. 27. The choice of working TP from a pair of TP 6.1.3
Serednyachki with experience from
1 year
Practical concentrate
skills
Who is conducting
training
Employees with experience from 5
years having high
results
Time best employees on
basic tasks
+
-
+
-
Top employees excluded from the process
mentoring
Already shallow all that does not give
steady result
"Serednyachki" with experience from
1 year
Practical concentrate
skills
Who is conducting
training
Employees with experience from 5
years having high
results
Time best employees on
basic tasks
+
-
+
-
Page 78
78
Resources:
Experienced staff → mentors -
tool
Time
experienced
employees
on
basic tasks - product
Project Sales Experience
Meeting Planning Time
Company product knowledge
Time to analyze transaction information
Accumulated customer base
Time to contact customer
Fame in the professional environment,
reputation
Time to prepare reports in CRM-
the system
Expertise in the client’s business
Time for lunch, rest during working hours
of the day
Psychological competence
RBI rule:
The X-element itself ensures that the best employees do not spend time on
training / mentoring.
As a result of substituting resources into the RBI formula, we obtain the following (we see that with
the RBI data better manages the resource of the product):
1. Adaptation of a new employee is divided into 2 parts: introductory course new employee
passes with the employee who conducts the initial introduction to the course of affairs and
answers some of the beginner's questions. The introductory course is conducted by an employee who has
1 year work experience and stable sales results. After passing
Introductory course, the new employee falls into the second stage of adaptation.
2. The second stage of adaptation is the “shadow”. That's what technology is called when new
the employee is trying to copy the actions of the wizard, in the course of playing it
action he is faced with a lot of obscure moments that
should fix in the form of questions. Then prepared questions new
the employee asks the mentor. The same technology can be used during
contacting an experienced employee with a client.
3. This is where the practice entrenched in a number of companies comes from - a progress diary
new employee. That is, the new employee does not record anywhere, but in
paper or electronic workbook with pre-prepared fields. So
information is better structured and amenable to subsequent analysis.
4. After successfully completing the second part of the adaptation, an experienced employee
allocates time in his schedule for “polishing” the skills of a new employee in
the process of monitoring its preparation for responsible meetings and contacts with
by the customer.
Those. to completely remove experienced employees from the mentoring process is irrational,
but it is possible to reduce their time in the process of mentoring by 2-3 times without reducing
process efficiency. The contradiction is partially resolved.
Based on the obtained solutions, the task manager developed an implementation program
new sales system, including a step-by-step action plan drawn up in the environment
www.trello.com using SCRUM technology [26]. Currently going
the process of implementing this program of activities .
Page 79
79
APPENDIX 6
General algorithm of work with organizational and managerial
tasks indicating the most commonly used tools.
When solving organizational and managerial tasks, we applied the most
various tools from the TRIZ arsenal [11]. Some tools from the arsenal
TRIZ are used in organizational and management tasks without any
methodological completion, and some had to be converted to requirements
“Soft” systems, primarily, for the requirements of business systems [2, 11].
In fig. 28 presents a simplified scheme of using TRIZ for solving business
tasks used by the author [46]. To describe the groups of tools, we introduce two important
concepts: product and result [10]. These terms are widely used in modern
management. A product is something that can be transferred to the next stage of work with a task,
that is, the "exit" of the instrument. The result is a refined understanding of the system or
process (analysis result).
Most often, such a scheme is used not so much to solve situational problems,
how much when performing projects in business systems:
Fig. 28. General scheme for the use of TRIZ tools in the implementation of projects in
organizational systems.
Page 80
80
So, the work on the task consists of five blocks (Fig. 28):
• Formulation and formalization of the task;
• Initial processing of the task;
• Highlighting a list of key contradictions;
• Decisive mechanisms;
• Verification of the decisions received.
We will reveal these mechanisms in more detail.
Formulation and formalization of the problem (steps 1–5, Fig. 28).
Process: communication in a team of professionals looking for a solution, designed
to understand the conditions of the problem.
The result: an understanding of the system’s design — what are the key elements
the composition of the system and how the most significant relationships between them are organized, as well as
which trajectories (step 5) should further transform the system.
Product: a set of unwanted effects that make up the problematic
situation (step 4) and the trajectories of further work with the task (step 5).
Initial processing of the task (steps 6–10, Fig. 28).
In fig. 1 not all the tools that we use in
TRIZ, but only the most commonly used.
Process: we analyze the cause-effect relationships, parameters and
structure of the system, determine the principles of its work.
Result: a deeper understanding of the connections in the system, a description is made
elements and their key parameters.
Product: key unwanted effects, secondary tasks, solution ideas.
Some ideas might appear at the previous stage, but when using
there are much more tools from this block.
Highlighting a list of key contradictions (step 11, Fig. 28).
Process: we determine the parameters that conflict with each other.
We distinguish secondary unwanted effects associated with the opposition of the system.
We are building contradictions.
Result: sharpening the task to the limit, which allows you to see the nodal points
tasks, to cut off all unnecessary - “white noise”, which is always in large quantities
accompanies organizational and managerial tasks.
Product: list of contradictions.
Decisive mechanisms (steps 12–13, Fig. 28).
There are several such mechanisms, most often we use two of them.
(steps 12 and 13).
Page 81
81
Note that the process of selecting an operational zone and determining resources in
within the operational area is part of step 12.
Process: using conflict resolution algorithms, we find ideas for
solutions to the problem.
The result and the product here coincide: ideas for solving the problem and tasks of the third
order. Such problems arise if the solutions found require further analysis.
(then return to steps 3, 7-10) or encounter significant resistance
system (then go to step 11 and resolve new contradictions).
Verification of the obtained solutions (step 15, Fig. 28).
Process: we analyze the received decisions, we compare them with the goals of customers
and key stakeholders. We pass a verdict: are solutions suitable for
introductions? If the answer is yes, then we proceed to the verification of the ratio of benefits
to the costs. If the benefits are incomparably greater than the cost of solving this problem (which
it happens, of course, not always), then we proceed to the planning of implementation, if not -
we return to the beginning of the algorithm and highlight additional tasks.
Result: understanding the next steps: we move on to planning implementation
or set new tasks.
Product: solutions and secondary tasks.
Now a little about the "parking" (step 14). "Parking" we call the place where
“Stored” ideas found in the process of working on the task (of course, parking is
not our invention, G.S. Altshuller suggested found solutions to mark as
"GI" is a brilliant idea). Ideas can come up at various stages of processing.
tasks from step 3 to step 15 inclusive. It’s important to park in time and
divided into categories so as not to lose and subsequently translate them into an action plan
on the implementation of ideas received during the implementation of the project.
In fig. 28 shows a general scheme for using TRIZ tools in projects,
implemented in organizational systems. Of course, in practice it’s not necessary
All tools depicted in this diagram apply. Instruments
used selectively. So, in the example from Appendix 5, primary tools
task processing was not used at all, but decomposition was applied
secondary tasks obtained by analyzing the circuit in Fig. 12. The decision process
tasks remains largely a creative process and, unfortunately, is still not enough
formalized and largely dependent on experience, competencies and psychological
solver features.
Page 82
82
SOURCES
1. Sosnin E.A., Poyzner B.N. Social Engineering Workbook
(interdisciplinary project) - Tomsk: Tomsk University Press,
2001.
2. V. Soushkov. TRIZ and Systematic Business Model Innovation, 2010. Bergamo
University Press. ISBN: 978-88-9633359-4
3. Technology of creative thinking / Mark Meerovich, Larisa Shragina. - M .:
Alpina Business Books, 2008.
4. Korolev V.A. Fundamentals of the system-process theory of convenience and
the life of organizations. Manuscript deposited in TRIZ fund
CHOUNB.
5. Korolev V.A. Modeling of social objects, 2004. Manuscript
deposited in the TRIZ CHOUNB fund.
6. Examples of the application of TRIZ to organizational and managerial tasks:
http://bmtriz.ru/articles/categories/1/
7. Fundamentals of the general theory of strong thinking, Khomenko NN, 1997. Manuscript
deposited in the TRIZ CHOUNB fund.
8. Shmakov BV, Schepetov EG Compliance of technical and
social systems, Chelyabinsk State University.
9. D. Mann. Hands-on Systematic Innovation for Business and Management ", IFR
Press, 2004. ISBN 1898546738
10. Reus A.G., Zinchenko A.P. Guide to Organization Methodology,
Leadership and Management / Readings on the work of G.P. Shchedrovitsky
M .: Alpina Publisher, 2012.
11. TRIZ: Solving business problems / A. Kozhemyako. - M .: Synergy University,
2017.
12. D. Mann. Physical Contradictions and Evaporating Clouds (Case Study
Applications of TRIZ and the Theory of Constraints), 2000
13. Adizes I.K. How to overcome management crises. Diagnostics and solution
managerial problems. - M .: Mann, Ivanov and Ferber, 2014.
14. Use SMART goals to launch management by objectives plan:
https://www.techrepublic.com/article/use-smart-goals-to-launch-management-by-
objectives-plan /
15. TRIZ. Analysis of technical information and the generation of new ideas: educational
allowance / N.A. Shpakovsky. - M.: Forum, 2010.
16. A. Kozhemyako. The era of smart sales in the B2B market. How to audit
commercial service on your own and break away from competitors, 2016
(electronic edition:
http://bmtriz.ru/anton_kozhemyako_era_umnyh_prodazh_kak_provesti_audit_ko
mmercheskoy_sluzhby_svoimi_silami_i_otorvatsya_ot_konkurentov /)
17. N. Feigenson. Advanced functional approach in TRIZ.
Report at the Scientific Conference “TRIZ. Application practice
methodological tools. " Moscow, 2017
18. Kudryavtsev A.V. TRIZ - tools for creating innovation for development
enterprises. Textbook, 2013.
19. G.S. Altshuller, B.L. Zlotin et al. Search for new ideas: from insight to
technologies. - Chisinau: Cartya Moldavanske, 1989.
Page 83
83
20. O. Cowan, E. Fedurko. Fundamentals of the theory of constraints. Library
strategic decisions of CBT, 2012. ISBN 978-9949-9148-1-4
21. Discovering the organization of the future / F. Lalu. - M .: Mann, Ivanov and Ferber,
2016.
22. Yu.P. Salamatov, I.M. Kondrakov. Evolution model of technical systems,
1986. The manuscript was deposited in the TRIZ CHOUNB fund.
23. Management / Drucker Peter F., Macjarello Joseph A. - LLC
"I.D. Williams", 2011.
24. Willpower. How to develop and strengthen / Kelly McGonigal; trans. from English Ksenia
Chistopol. - 2nd ed. - M .: Mann, Ivanov and Ferber, 2013.
25. Find an idea: Introduction to TRIZ - the theory of solving inventive problems /
Heinrich Altshuller. - 3rd ed. - M .: Alpina Publishers, 2010.
26. Scrum. Revolutionary Project Management Method / Jeff Sutherland;
trans. from English M. Geskina - M .: Mann, Ivanov and Ferber, 2016.
27. The era of smart sales in the b2b market / A.P. Kozhemyako. - M.: Moscow
Synergy Financial and Industrial University, 2013.
28. The era of smart sales. Strategy and management / A.P. Kozhemyako. - M .:
Moscow Financial and Industrial University "Synergy", 2013.
29. Psychological effects in management and marketing. 100+ directions
increasing efficiency in management / A.P. Kozhemyako. - M.: Moscow
Synergy Financial and Industrial University, 2015.
30. Eighth skill: From efficiency to greatness / Stephen R. Covey; Per. from English
- 4th ed. - M .: Alpina Publishers, 2009.
31. Abraham H. Maslow. Motivation and Personality (2nd ed.) NY: Harper & Row,
1970; St. Petersburg: Eurasia, 1999. Translation by A. M. Tatlybaeva.
32. Think like a designer. Design thinking for managers / J. Lidtka, T.
Ogilvy. - M .: Mann, Ivanov and Ferber, 2015.
33. Asana: The easiest way to manage team projects and tasks:
https://asana.com/product.
34. Business process modeling notations:
http://www.businessstudio.ru/products/business_studio/notations/
35. Scribing: description and tools:http://nitforyou.com/scribe/
36. New appointment. Kuryshev V.A., 1994
37. Methodological materials for the 45th author’s seminar Khomenko N.N.
“Modern intellectual technologies based on TRIZ”, Minsk
1996.
38. Anti-fragility. How to capitalize on chaos / N. N. Taleb. - M .:
Publishing Group "Alphabet-Atticus", 2014.
39. V. Sushkov. Ideality in business, 2015
40. V.G. Siberians. Invention in business or “development” through
Contradictions, 1999
41. G.P. Shchedrovitsky. Organizational thinking: ideology, methodology,
technology (lecture course). - M.: Publishing house of the studio Artemy Lebedev,
2015 year
42. GLOSSARY OF TRIZ AND TRIZ-RELATED TERMS, VERSION 1.2. Valeri
Souchkov, The International TRIZ Association - MATRIZ, 2018.
43. A.V. Efimov. Methodology of MPV analysis, 2008
44. M.S. Ruby. TRIZ in small business - competitive handicap, 2004
Page 84
84
45. Yu.G. Chernikov. System analysis and operations research. - M .:
Publishing House of Moscow State Mining University, 2006.
46. ​​A. Kozhemyako. A little bit about the systems thinking of the department head
sales. We apply system analysis. Sales Management, 03 (98),
2018 year
47. Altshuller G.S., ARIZ - means victory - Sat: Rules of the game without rules,
Petrozavodsk, Karelia, 1989, p. 17.
